
BOOK  I 
BALA    KANDA 


CHAPTER     X 

Shri  Narada  relates  to  Valmiki  the  story  of  Rama 

The  Sage  Valmiki,1  chief  among  the  munis1  and  the  most 
eloquent  of  men,  constantly  engaged  in  the  practice  of  self- 
control  and  the  study  of  the  holy  scriptures,  enquired  of  Shri 
Narada  :3 — 

"  Who  is  there  in  the  world  to-day,  endowed  with  excellent 
and  heroic  qualities,  who  is  versed  in  all  the  duties  of  life, 
grateful,  truthful,  firm  in  his  vows,  an  actor  of  many  parts, 
benevolent  to  all  beings,  learned,  eloquent,  handsome,  patient, 
slow  to  anger,  one  who  is  truly  great ;  who  is  free  from  envy 
and  when  excited  to  wrath  can  strike  terror  into  the  hearts 
of  celestial  beings  ?  O  Sage,  I  would  hear  of  such  a  man  from 
thee,  who  art  able  to  describe  him  to  me.1' 

Narada,  acquainted  with  the  past,  the  present  and  the  future, 
pleased  with  the  words  of  the  Sage  Valmiki,  answered  him 
saying: — 

"  Rare  indeed  are  those,  endowed  with  the  qualities  thou 
hast  enumerated,  yet  I  can  tell  thee  of  such  a  one.  Born  in 
the  family  of  Ikshwaku,*  he  is  named  Rama  ;*  one  renowned, 
fully  self-controlled,  valorous  and  illustrious,  the  Lord  of  AIL 
Wise,  conversant  with  the  ethical  code,  eloquent,  fortunate} 
a  slayer  of  his  foes,  broad-shouldered,  long-armed,  possessing 
a  conch-shaped  neck  and  prominent  chin,  eminent  in  archery, 
with  a  muscular  body,  arms  extending  to  the  knees,  and  a 
noble  head  and  brow ;   of  mighty  prowess  ;   possessing  well- 

i  Valmiki.        Once  a  robber  chief,  became  later  a  fully  illumined  sage, 

author  of  Ramayana. 
1  Muni.  A  holy  sage,  a  pious  and  learned  person. 

'  Narada.         A  great  rishi,  son  of  Brahma,  the  Creator.     Many  hymns 

of  the  Rig-veda  are  attributed  to  him. 
*  Ikshwaku.     Son  of  Manu,  founder  of  the  Solar  race  of  kings,  who  r 

in  Ayodbya. 


THE  RAMAYANA  OF  VALMIKI 
proportioned  limbs  and  skin  of  bluish  tint,1  one  renowned  for 
his  virtue ;  of  prominent  eyes,  deep-chested,  bearing  auspicious 
marks ;  one  who  protects  those  who  take  refuge  in  him  and  is 
ever-mindful  of  the  good  of  those  dependent  on  him  ;  true  to 
his  promises,  benevolent  to  his  subjects,  omniscient,  renowned 
for  his  good  deeds,  pure,  and  ever  responsive  to  devotion  ;  med- 
itating on  his  own  essence. 

"  Equal  to  Brahma,  the  Protector  of  his  people,  pleasing  to 
look  upon ;  supporting  the  universe ;  the  destroyer  of  those 
who  contravene  the  moral  code ;  the  inspirer  of  virtue ;  the 
giver  of  special  grace  to  his  devotees  and  to  those  who  duly 
observe  sacrificial  rites  and  are  charitable ;  conversant  with 
the  essence  of  the  Vedic  philosophy  ;  an  adept  in  the  science 
of  warfare ;  skilled  in  the  scriptural  law  ;  of  infallible  memory  ; 
beloved  of  all ;  of  courteous  disposition  ;  incapable  of  cowardice  ; 
acquainted  with  the  laws  of  this  world  as  also  of  the  other 
worlds. 

"As  the  rivers  hasten  to  the  ocean,  so  do  men  of  virtue  ever 
approach  him. 

"  Equal  to  Vishnu2  in  valour ;  grateful  to  the  sight  as  the 
full  moon ;  when  stirred  to  righteous  anger,  resembling  all- 
consuming  death ;  in  patience  like  the  earth,  in  generosity  like 
Kuvera  ;*  in  truthfulness  the  personification  of  virtue.  Such 
are  his  great  qualities — Rama,  the  beloved  heir  of  King  Dasar- 
atha,  possessing  every  excellent  attribute,  benevolent  to  all, 
devoted  to  the  welfare  of  every  living  being." 

His  father,  King  Dasaratha,  made  preparations  to  install  him 
as  his  regent,  but  the  Queen  Kaikeyi,  claiming  the  boons  formerly 
promised  to  her,  demanded  the  exile  of  Rama  and  the  enthrone- 
ment of  her  own  son  Bharata.  The  king  held  by  his  promise 
and  by  the  ties  of  honour,  sent  his  son  Rama,  whom  he  loved 
as  his  own  life,  into  exile.  Obeying  the  command  of  his  royal 
sire,  and  in  order  to  gratify  Kaikeyi,  Shri  Rama  went  to  the 
forest. 

The  son  of  Queen  Sumitra,  Prince  Lakshmana,  inspired  by 
affection  and  humility,  followed  his  brother  Rama  into  exile. 

1  bluish-tint.    The  Incarnations  or  Divine  Descents  called  Avataras  are  said 

to  have  the  colour  of  a  new-born  cloud. 
1  Vishnu.  The  Lord  as  Maintainer  and  Supporter  of  the  Universe. 

■  Kuvera.         The  God  of  wealth. 


BALA    KANDA 

The  daughter  of  King  Janaka,  an  incarnation  of  Lakshmi,1 
endowed  with  the  highest  feminine  virtues,  seeing  Prince 
Lakshmana  accompanying  Rama,  obedient  to  her  lord,  followed 
him  as  Venus  follows  the  moon. 

Accompanied  for  some  leagues  by  King  Dasaratha  and  his 
people,  Rama  dismissed  the  chariot  on  reaching  the  town  of 
Shringavera  on  the  banks  of  the  Ganges,  and  commanded  the 
minister  Sumantra  to  return  to  the  capital. 

Here  the  prince  met  his  beloved  Guha,  the  chief  of  the 
Chandalas,3  accompanied  by  whom,  with  Lakshmana  and  Sita, 
he  crossed  the  river  Ganges  and  entered  the  forest,  arriving  at 
length  at  the  Chittrakuta  mountain  described  by  the  Sage 
Bharadwaja.  Rama,  Lakshmana  and  Sita  dwelt  happily  in  the 
forest  like  devas3  or  gandharvas,* 

Overwhelmed  with  grief  at  the  separation  from  his  sons  and 
lamenting  their  absence,  the  king  departed  this  life,  while  Rama 
was  dwelling  on  the  Chittrakuta  mountain. 

The  holy  sages  offered  the  throne,  left  vacant  on  the  death 
of  King  Dasaratha,  to  Prince  Bharata,  who  declined  it,  not 
desiring  the  kingdom.  Setting  forth  to  the  forest  where  Shri 
Rama  dwelt,  in  order  to  propitiate  him,  he  approached  that  hero 
of  truth  with  humility  and  directing  his  attention  to  the  code 
of  justice  with  which  he  was  conversant,  requested  Rama  to 
return  and  govern  the  kingdom. 

The  magnanimous,  handsome  and  mighty  Rama  refused  to 
accept  the  throne,  preferring  to  carry  out  the  command  of  his 
sire  and,  presenting  Prince  Bharata  with  his  sandals  as  a  symbol 
of  authority,  repeatedly  exhorted  him  to  return  to  the  capital. 

Shri  Bharata,  touching  the  feet  of  Rama  in  submission, 
departed  and  began  to  rule  the  dominion  from  the  town  of 
Nandigrama,  while  eagerly  awaiting  the  return  of  his  brother. 

The  sages  and  hermits,  who  dwelt  in  the  forest,  constantly 
harassed  by  asuras,6  approached  Shri  Ramachandra  to  ask  for 
his  protection — Shri  Rama  agreed  to  slay  the  evil  asuras  in 
order  to  preserve  the  Sages  who  had  sought  his  help.   The  holy 

1  Lakshmi.     The  consort  of  Shri  Vishnu,    q.v. 

1  Chandalas.     Outcast. 

1  Devas.     Gods  or  celestial  beings,  literally  "  shining  ones  ", 

4  Gandharvas.     Heavenly  musicians. 

1  Asuras.    A  race  of  demons. 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 
men,  whose  appearance  equalled  the  fire  in  lustre,  heard  of 
Shri  Rama's  resolve  and  were  assured  by  him  of  his  pro- 
tection. 

The  female  asura  Shurpanakha,  who  could  assume  various 
forms  at  will,  was  overpowered  and  disfigured  by  Rama  and 
Lakshmana.  All  the  wicked  rakshasas1  came  led  by  Khara, 
Dushana  and  Trishira,  to  engage  in  combat  with  Shri  Rama,  and 
were  slain  by  him.  Shri  Rama  slew  fourteen  thousand  rakshasas 
who  dwelt  in  that  forest.  Hearing  of  the  slaughter  of  the 
rakshasas,  King  Ravana  transported  with  rage,  took  with  him 
Maricha,  a  demon  like  himself.  Maricha,  knowing  the  superior 
strength  of  Rama,  sought  to  dissuade  Ravana  from  entering 
into  combat  with  him,  but  Ravana  who  was  marked  down  by 
destiny,  disregarded  the  advice  and  went  with  Maricha  to  Shri 
Rama's  abode.  There,  Maricha  lured  Shri  Rama  and  Laksh- 
mana away  from  the  hermitage,  and  Ravana,  having  slain  the 
vulture  Jatayu,  carried  Sita  away. 

Learning  from  the  dying  Jatayu  of  the  abduction  of  the 
daughter  of  the  King  of  Mithila,  Shri  Rama  was  overwhelmed 
with  grief  and  began  to  mourn. 

Having  performed  the  funeral  rites  of  the  vulture,  while 
wandering  in  search  of  Sita,  he  encountered  an  asura  named 
Kabandha  whose  form  was  menacing  and  terrible. 

Shri  Rama  slew  him  and  then  performed  the  funeral  rites 
whereupon  his  soul  ascended  to  heaven.  While  passing  to  the 
celestial  sphere,  Kabandha  spoke  to  Rama  of  Shabari,  a  female 
ascetic,  and  entreated  him  to  visit  her.  Shri  Rama,  the  ever 
resplendent  Destroyer  of  his  foes,  came  to  where  Shabari  dwelt 
and  was  duly  worshipped  by  her. 

On  the  banks  of  the  Lake  Pampa,  Shri  Rama  met  the  monkey 
Hanuman  who  presented  Sugriva  to  him.  The  mighty  Rama 
related  the  whole  of  his  story  to  him  as  far  as  the  abduction 
of  Shri  Sita.  Sugriva  having  listened  to  Shri  Rama  entered 
into  the  rite  of  friendship  with  him,  witnessed  by  the  fire. 
With  full  faith  in  Rama,  Sugriva  then  recounted  to  him  all 
the  sufferings  he  had  endured  through  his  enmity  with  Bali8 
and  the  great  daring  of  the  latter.    Then  Shri  Rama  vowed  to 

1  Evil  spirits  or  fiends,  enemies  of  the  gods. 

■  Bali  or  Vali — a  Titan  King,  son  of  Virochana,  son  of  Prahlada. 


BALA    KANDA 

slay  Bali,  but  Sugriva,  uncertain  of  Rama's  prowess  and  desiring  to 
test  him,  snowed  him  the  bones  of  the  body  of  Dundhubi,1 
forming  a  heap  as  high  as  a  mountain.  With  his  foot,  Rama 
kicked  the  heap  to  a  distance  of  ten  yojanas  and,  discharging  an 
arrow,  pierced  seven  palmyra  trees,  cleaving  a  mountain  and  with 
the  shaft  penetrating  to  the  centre  of  the  earth.  Having  witnessed 
this  exploit,  Sugriva  was  satisfied,  and  thereafter  trusted  Rama 
implicitly.  In  his  company  he  passed  through  deep  valleys  to 
the  town  of  Kishkindhya ;  there,  the  yellow-eyed  Sugriva  roared 
like  thunder.  At  this  terrible  sound,  the  powerful  and  valiant 
monkey  chief,  Bah,  issued  forth,  disregarding  the  warning  of 
his  wife  Tara,  and  engaged  in  combat  with  Sugriva. 

As  desired  by  Sugriva,  Shri  Rama  slew  Bali  with  a  single 
arrow;  then  he  entrusted  the  government  of  Kishkindhya 
to  Sugriva  who  now,  as  king  of  the  monkey  tribe,  gathered 
his  forces  together  and  dispatched  them  to  every  quarter  in 
search  of  Sita. 

The  vulture  chief,  the  courageous  Sampati,  informed  Hanu- 
man  where  Sita  was,  whereupon  the  monkey  leapt  over  the  sea 
that  lies  between  Bharatvarsh1  and  Lanka,3  a  distance  of  five 
hundred  miles. 

Entering  the  city  of  Lanka  that  was  protected  by  Ravana, 
Hanuman  beheld  Sita,  meditating  on  Rama  in  the  ashoka  garden. 
He  there  delivered  Rama's  ring  to  her  and  acquainted  her  with 
the  welfare  of  her  lord.  Having  revived  the  courage  of  Sita, 
he  shattered  the  gate  of  the  garden  and  slew  seven  sons  of  the 
counsellors  of  Ravana,  five  great  captains  and  levelled  Akshya- 
kumara,  the  son  of  Ravana,  to  the  dust.  Then  he  suffered 
himself  to  be  taken  captive. 

Knowing  he  could  not  be  subdued  by  the  weapon  granted  by 
Brahma  to  Ravana,  yet  acknowledging  the  power  of  its  blessing,* 
Hanuman  allowed  himself  to  be  imprisoned,  suffering  many 
indignities.  Subsequently  he  burnt  the  whole  of  Lanka,  only 
sparing  the  place  where  Sita  dwelt. 

>  Dundhubi — a  giant. 

1  Bharatvarsh— India.  ' 

1  Lanka — Ceylon. 

*  The  God  Brahma  had  given  Ravana  a  weapon  which  entangled  everyone  on 
whom  it  was  used  bo  that  they  could  not  escape.  It  was  Fitting,  therefore,  that 
Hanuman,  though  not  subject  to  it,  should  acknowledge  the  goat  power. 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 

Returning  to  deliver  his  welcome  tidings,  he  respectfully 
circumambulated  the  mighty  Rama  and  recounted  in  detail  how 
he  had  found  Sim. 

Setting  out  in  the  company  of  Sugriva  and  others,  Rama 
reached  the  sea.  There  he  created  a  tempest  by  his  shining 
arrows  and  the  Lord  of  the  waters,  Sumudra,  appeared  before 
him.  Under  his  direction,  Nala  threw  a  bridge  over  the  sea. 
Crossing  the  sea  by  means  of  this  bridge,  Shri  Rama  entered 
Lanka,  slew  Ravana  in  battle  and  recovered  Sita,  but  she  being 
the  subject  of  slander,  was  addressed  by  him  with  harsh  words  in 
the  midst  of  the  assembly.  After  hearing  the  words  of  Rama 
with  forbearance,  Sita  entered  a  great  fire.  On  the  testimony 
of  the  fire  god,  Sita  was  proved  to  be  innocent  and  Rama, 
adored  by  all  the  gods,  was  content. 

The  animate  and  inanimate  beings  of  the  three  worlds,1  the 
gods  and  the  sages,  gave  thanks  that  Ravana  had  been  slain  by 
Shri  Rama.  Shri  Rama  enthroned  Vibishana2  as  the  king  of 
the  asuras  and,  being  wholly  satisfied,  revived  all  the  monkeys 
and  asuras  who  had  fallen  in  battle. 

In  the  aerial  chariot,  Pushpaka,  accompanied  by  Sugriva, 
Shri  Rama,  a  devotee  of  truth,  reached  the  hermitage  of 
Bharadwaja.  From  there,  he  sent  Hanuman  to  Prince  Bharata, 
as  his  messenger  and  conversing  with  Sugriva  again  mounted 
the  aerial  chariot  and  arrived  at  Nandigrarna. 

Ever  obedient  to  his  father,  Shri  Rama  then  cut  off  his  matted 
locks  and  with  Sita  occupied  the  throne  of  Ayodhya. 

Seeing  Shri  Rama  occupying  the  throne,  the  people  were 
happy  and  satisfied,  virtuous  and  free  from  sickness,  sorrow, 
famine  or  danger.  None  witnessed  the  death  of  his  son ;  no 
woman  became  a  widow  and  all  were  devoted  to  their  husbands ; 
there  was  no  danger  from  tempests ;  none  perished  by  water ; 
nor  was  there  any  cause  of  fear  from  fire ;  fever  and  plague 
were  unknown ;  there  was  no  want,  and  no  danger  from  thieves. 
Cities  and  villages  were  rich  and  prosperous ;  all  lived  happily 
as  in  the  Satya  Yuga.3 

Shri  Rama  and  Sita  observed  countless  Vedic  sacrifices  and 

1  fihur,  bhuvah,  swah.    The  lower,  middle  and  upper  worlds. 

*  Eibishana  or  Vibishana.    Younger  brother  of  Ravana,  but  a  devotee  of  Rama. 

*  Satva-Yuga.    The  golden  age. 

S 


BALA    KANDA 

gave  much  gold,  and  hundreds  of  thousands  of  cows  in  charity, 
thus  preparing  for  themselves  a  place  in  the  divine  regions. 
Shri  Rama  added  incalculably  to  the  prosperity  of  the  dynasty, 
and  bestowed  immense  wealth  on  the  brahmins.  He  employed 
his  subjects  in  the  duties  of  their  respectives  castes  and  ruled 
for  eleven  thousand  years,  after  which  he  returned  to  his  celestial 
abode,  Vaikuntha. 

He  who  reads  the  story  of  Rama,  which  imparts  merit  and 
purity,  is  freed  from  all  sin.  He  who  reads  it  with  faith  and 
devotion  is  ultimately  worshipped  together  with  his  sons, 
grandsons  and  servants  at  his  death. 

A  brahmin1  reading  this  becomes  proficient  in  the  Vedas, 
and  philosophy ;  a  kshatriya1  becomes  a  king ;  a  vaishya1  grows 
prosperous  in  trade ;  a  shudra,1  on  reading  this  will  become 
great  in  his  caste. 


CHAPTER    2 

Sage  Valmiki  creates  the  metrical  form  for  the  story 

The  wise  and  eloquent  Valmiki  with  his  disciple,  Bharadwaja, 
having  listened  to  the  words  of  Narada,  was  filled  with  wonder 
and  worshipped  Rama  in  his  heart.  He  offered  obeisance  to 
Shri  Narada,  who  craved  permission  to  depart  and  on  his  request 
being  granted  he  ascended  through  space  to  the  heavens. 

Narada,  having  departed,  the  great  Muni  Valmiki  proceeded 
to  the  banks  of  the  river  Tamasa,  which  was  close  to  the  Ganges. 
Reaching  that  place  and  seeing  the  pure  and  limpid  waters, 
Valmiki  said  to  his  disciple :  "  O  Bharadwaja,  behold  how  pure 
is  the  water  of  the  holy  river,  verily  it  is  clear  and  pleasant 
like  the  mind  of  a  good  man.  O  Child,  set  down  the  waterpot 
and  fetch  me  my  bark  robe  from  the  hermitage.  I  wish  to  bathe 
in  the  sacred  stream,  delay  not." 

Obedient  to  the  command  of  his  Guru,2  the  disciple  brought 

1  The  four  traditional  castes  ;    the  priests,  the  warriors,  the  merchants  and 
those  who  serve  the  other  three 
*  Guru.    Traditional  spiritual  preceptor. 

9 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 

the  raiment  from  the  Sage's  hermitage  and  returning  speedily, 
offered  it  to  him.  Receiving  the  robe  of  bark  from  the  hands 
of  his  disciple,  the  sage,  with  his  senses  fully  controlled,  girded 
it  about  him  and  while  bathing  repeated  the  traditional  prayers, 
offering  libations  of  water  to  his  ancestors  and  the  gods.  Then 
he  wandered  about  in  the  forest  enjoying  the  beauties  of  nature. 

Now  the  august  sage,  Shri  Valmiki,  beheld  a  pair  of  Krauncha1 
birds  fearlessly  disporting  themselves  in  love.  Soon  after,  a 
fowler  stealing  up  unobserved,  slew  the  male  bird  in  the 
presence  of  the  sage.  The  female  bird,  deprived  of  her  yellow 
crested  companion,  who  but  now  had  been  spreading  his  wings 
in  the  act  of  love  to  please  her,  perceiving  him  bleeding  and 
crying  out  in  distress,  began  to  mourn. 

The  heart  of  the  sage  was  filled  with  pity  on  seeing  the  bird 
struck  down  by  the  fowler.  Touched  by  the  lament  of  the 
female  krauncha  and  incensed  by  the  cruel  act  of  the  fowler, 
the  sage  said :  "  O  Fowler,  having  killed  the  bird  in  the  midst 
of  the  enjoyment  of  love  with  its  mate,  thou  shalt  never  attain 
prosperity.  Do  not  visit  the  forest  for  many  years  lest  evil 
overtake  thee." 

Reflecting  on  the  words  he  had  addressed  to  the  fowler  and 
realising  their  implication,  the  sage  said  to  himself :  "  What 
words  are  these  that  I  have  uttered,  inspired  by  my  compassion 
for  the  dying  bird  ?  " 

The  wise  and  learned  sage  reflected  a  moment,  and  then  said 
to  his  disciple :  "  Grieving  for  the  dying  bird,  I  have  recited 
this  verse  of  four  feet,  each  of  equal  syllables,  which  can  be 
sung  to  the  vina.*  May  it  bring  me  renown  and  may  no  ill 
be  spoken  of  me  on  account  of  this." 

With  great  delight  the  disciple  committed  to  memory  the  verse 
composed  by  his  spiritual  preceptor,  who  expressed  his  satisfac- 
tion at  the  skill  of  his  pupU  Bharadwaja.  Bathing  in  the  sacred 
river,  according  to  the  prescribed  ritual,  the  sage  returned  to 
his  hermitage,  pondering  over  the  matter.  The  humble  and 
learned  disciple  Bharadwaja  followed  the  great  Sage,  carrying 
his  loshta  filled  with  water. 

On  entering  the  hermitage,  the  sage  worshipped  the  Lord 

1  Krauncha.    Ardea  jaculator,  a  species  of  heron. 
*  Vina.    A  musical  stringed  instrument. 


BALA    KANDA 

and  performed  other  rituals  and  having  instructed  his  disciple 
in  the  tradition  and  the  sacred  history,  passed  into  deep 
meditation.  The  Creator  of  the  world,  the  Self-born,  the  four- 
faced  and  glorious  Brahma  at  length  appeared  before  the  holy 
sage.  Valmiki  rose  hastily,  filled  with  astonishment,  and 
welcoming  the  Deity  in  great  humility,  offered  obeisance  to 
Him.  Leading  Him  to  a  seat,  in  profound  reverence  he  poured 
forth  libations  of  water  as  enjoined  in  the  tradition,  making 
enquiries  as  to  His  welfare.  The  Blessed  Lord  accepted  the 
homage  offered  to  Him  and  commanded  the  sage  to  be  seated. 
Shri  Valmiki  occupied  the  place  designated  by  Brahma  and 
once  more  recollected  his  grief  over  the  incident  of  the  wicked 
fowler,  who  ruthlessly  slew  the  bird  that  was  so  happy  and 
cooing  with  delight.  He  recalled  the  grief  of  the  female  bird 
and  read  and  re-read  the  lines : — 

"  By  the  ignorant  and  wicked  fowler,  grief  is  born 
For  he  has  wantonly  slain  the  melodious  krauncha." 

Shri  Brahma,  seeing  the  sage  afflicted  and  sorrowful,  said  to  him : 
"  O  Great  Sage,  let  these  words  spontaneously  uttered  by  thee, 
inspired  by  the  death  of  the  krauncha,  be  poetry.  Do  thou 
describe  the  whole  story  of  Rama,  who  is  the  essence  of  virtue 
and  full  of  the  highest  attributes,  in  accordance  with  what  thou 
hast  heard  from  Shri  Narada.  Do  thou  narrate  all  the  known 
and  hitherto  unknown  deeds  of  Shri  Rama,  Sita  and  Lakshmana 
and  the  asuras.  Whatever  relates  to  King  Dasaratha,  his 
wives,  city,  palace,  sayings,  conduct  and  what  he  accomplished, 
will  be  revealed  to  thee  by  my  favour.  None  of  thy  words 
will  prove  false.  Do  thou  render  into  verse  the  sacred  and 
delightful  deeds  of  Rama.  O  Sage,  as  long  as  the  mountains 
and  rivers  remain  on  the  earth,  so  long  will  the  story  of  Shri 
Rama  endure.  So  long  as  the  story  of  Rama  endures,  so  long 
shalt  thou  abide  in  the  higher  regions." 

Having  uttered  these  words,  Shri  Brahma  pondered  awhile 
within  Himself  and  then  vanished  from  sight. 

The  great  sage  and  his  disciple  were  filled  with  amazement 
at  this  event,  and  reading  the  stanza  again  and  again,  their 
delight  grew.  Repeatedly  reciting  the  couplet,  composed  by 
Valmiki,  they  realised  that  the  holy  sage  had  expressed  his  sorrow 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 

in  poetic  form.  Then  Shri  Valmiki  meditated  on  the  Lord 
within  his  soul  and  it  occurred  to  him  to  relate  the  story  of  Rama 
in  similar  verse.  For  the  good  of  the  world,  the  illustrious 
and  holy  sage,  therefore,  began  composing  the  life  of  Shri  Rama 
in  verse ;  that  Rama,  worthy  of  world-wide  renown,  who  is 
both  generous  and  charming.  Shri  Valmiki  composed  the  story 
of  the  life  of  Rama  and  of  the  slaying  of  Ravana  in  beautiful 
and  measured  stanzas,  a  work  of  infinite  merit 


chapter   3 

The  deeds  of  Rama  that  will  be  described  in  the  sacred  poem 

Having  heard  the  story  of  the  life  of  the  sagacious  Rama  from 
the  lips  of  Shri  Narada  which,  when  recounted,  confers  perfect 
righteousness  on  the  hearer,  the  holy  sage  wished  to  know  more 
concerning  tile  sacred  theme.  Washing  his  hands  and  feet  and 
drinking  a  little  pure  water,  placing  himself  facing  the  east  on 
a  seat  of  kusha  grass,  with  joined  palms,  he  passed  into  profound 
meditation  and  in  a  vision  beheld  the  history  of  Rama.  Through 
the  grace  of  Shri  Brahma,  the  holy  sage  saw  all  that  Rama, 
Sita  and  Lakshmana  had  experienced,  observed  and  done.  He 
witnessed  in  detail  the  life  of  Rama,  who  was  truth  incarnate 
and  all  that  he  had  accomplished  in  the  forest  and  other  places. 

By  the  power  of  spiritual  meditation  and  yoga,  the  Sage 
Valmiki  saw  the  whole  past  as  clearly  as  if  it  were  a  fruit  placed 
on  the  palm  of  his  hand.  Thus,  having  witnessed  all,  the  most 
enlightened  sage  began  to  describe  the  life  of  Shri  Rama  in  verse. 

The  history  of  Shri  Rama,  which  confers  righteousness, 
worldly  prosperity  and  delight  on  the  reader,  which  does  not 
degrade  the  mind  and  grants  release  from  sorrow,  that  story 
which  charms  the  heart  and  is  as  full  of  lovely  gems  as  is  the  sea, 
was  rendered  by  Shri  Valmiki,  in  the  form  in  which  Shri  Narada 
had  related  it  to  him. 

The  birth  of  Rama,  his  valour,  his  benevolence  to  all  men, 
his  universal  goodwill,  his  clemency,  bis  pleasing  looks,  bis 
12 


BALA    KANDA 

sweet  disposition,  his  love  of  truth,  his  humility,  his  helpful 
services  to  the  Sage  Vishwamitra,  the  instruction  given  by  the 
Sage  Vishwamitra  to  him  and  his  patient  hearing  of  it ;  his 
breaking  of  the  great  bow ;  his  marriage  to  Princess  Sita ; 
his  controversy  with  Parasurama ;  the  preparations  for  his 
coronation ;  a  description  of  his  great  qualities ;  the  opposi- 
tion offered  by  Queen  Kaikeyi  to  the  coronation  ;  his  departure 
to  the  forest ;  the  lament  and  death  of  King  Dasaratha,  the  grief 
of  the  people  of  Ayodhya ;  Rama's  speech  with  the  ferryman ; 
his  farewell  to  Sumantra ;  his  crossing  of  the  Ganges ;  his  visit 
to  the  holy  Sage  Bharadwaja ;  his  departure  for  Chittrakuta 
on  the  instance  of  the  sage ;  his  dwelling  in  the  leaf-thatched  hut 
on  Mount  Chittrakuta ;  the  grief  of  the  king  on  Sumantra's 
return  and  the  monarch's  departure  to  heaven ;  the  arrival  of 
Shri  Bharata  at  Chittrakuta  to  persuade  Rama  to  return  to  his 
kingdom  ;  his  stay  at  the  hermitage  ;  his  interview  with  Rama  ; 
the  funeral  rites  of  his  sire ;  Rama's  refusal  to  return ;  the 
receiving  of  Rama's  sandals  by  Bharata  as  a  symbol  of  authority  ; 
Bharata's  installation  of  the  symbol  and  bis  ruling  of  Ayodhya 
from  Nandigrama ;  Shri  Rama's  visit  to  the  Dandaka  forest ; 
his  slaying  of  the  wicked  Virodha;*  his  interview  with  the  Sage 
Sharabhanga ;  his  arrival  at  the  hermitage  of  Sutikshna ;  the 
meeting  of  Anasuya  with  Shri  Sita  and  the  imparting  of  teachings 
to  her ;  the  visit  of  the  Sage  Agastya ;  his  residence  at 
Panchavati ;  the  meeting  with  Jatayu ;  the  appearance  of 
Shurparnakha ;  the  conversation  of  Rama  and  Lakshmana  with 
her ;  Shuparnakha's  mutilation ;  the  slaying  of  Khara,  Dusana 
and  Trishira  ;  the  arrival  of  Ravana  ;  the  slaying  of  Maricha  ; 
the  abduction  of  Sita ;  Rama's  lament  on  his  separation  from 
Sita ;  the  slaying  of  Jatayu  by  Ravana ;  the  meeting  with 
Kabandha  ;  the  arrival  at  Lake  Pampa  ;  Rama's  interview  with 
Shabari  ;  his  arrival  at  the  Rishyamukha  mountain  ;  his  meeting 
with  Hanuman  j  Rama's  seal  of  friendship  with  Sugriva ;  his 
promise  to  destroy  Bali ;  the  combat  between  Bali  and  Sugriva  ; 
the  slaying  of  Bali ;  the  mourning  of  Tara  ;  the  installation 
of  Sugriva ;  Shri  Rama's  sojourn  on  the  mountain  in  the  rainy 
season ;  Sugriva's  exceeding  of  the  stated  time  for  his  mission, 
Rama's  anger  against  him ;  Lakshmana's  delivery  of  the  message 

1  Virodha.    A  man-eating  demon. 

'3 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 

to  Sugriva ;  Sugriva's  visit  to  Rama ;  his  propitiation  of  Rama ; 
the  organising  of  the  monkey  army ;  the  dispatch  of  the  monkeys 
to  find  Sita's  abode ;  the  description  of  the  earth  given  to  them ; 
the  giving  of  Rama's  ring  to  Hanuman ;  the  monkeys  entry  into 
the  dark  cave ;  their  fasting  on  the  seashore  in  preparation  for 
death ;  their  interview  with  Sampati,  the  king  of  the  vultures ; 
bis  information  respecting  Lanka ;  Hanuman's  leap  and  his 
crossing  of  the  sea ;  the  emergence  of  the  Minaka  hill  from  the 
ocean ;  the  slaying  of  the  wicked  female  demon  Singhika  who 
imprisoned  her  victims  by  capturing  their  shadow  ;  the  appear- 
ance of  Lanka  by  night ;  the  entry  of  Hanuman  into  Lanka 
and  his  lonely  reflections ;  his  seeing  of  the  wicked  Ravana 
and  his  aerial  chariot  Pushpaka ;  Hanuman's  entry  into  the 
inner  apartments,  where  Ravana  is  drinking  surrounded  by 
women ;  Hanuman's  search  for  Sita  and  his  beholding  of  the 
princess  in  the  ashoka  garden ;  Havana's  entry  into  the  garden 
and  his  solicitation  of  Sita  ;  her  reproaches  ;  the  threatening 
of  Sita  by  the  female  asuras ;  Trijata's  description  of  her  dream 
concerning  the  delivery  of  Shri  Rama's  ring  to  Sita  by  Hanuman  ; 
the  conversation  on  this  matter ;  the  gift  of  the  jewel  to 
Hanuman  by  Sita ;  the  destruction  of  the  grove  by  Hanuman  ; 
the  flight  of  the  women  asuras ;  the  slaying  of  Ravana's  guards 
by  Hanuman ;  the  capture  of  Hanuman  and  the  burning  of 
Lanka  by  him ;  the  re-crossing  of  the  sea ;  the  eating  of  the 
fruits  of  the  Madhu  forest ;  the  words  of  consolation  offered 
to  Shri  Rama  by  Hanuman  and  the  delivery  of  Shri  Sita's  jewel 
to  him ;  the  arrival  of  Shri  Rama  at  the  seashore  and  the 
bridging  of  the  sea  by  Nala  and  Nila ;  the  siege  of  Lanka ; 
the  arrival  of  Ravana's  brother  Vibishana  to  take  refuge  with 
Shri  Rama  and  the  disclosure  by  him  of  the  design  to  destroy 
Ravana ;  the  slaying  of  Kumbhakarna  and  Meghanada ;  the 
destruction  of  Ravana ;  the  reunion  with  Sita ;  the  crowning 
of  Vibishana,  King  of  Lanka ;  the  offer  of  the  aerial  chariot 
Pushpaka  by  Vibishana  to  Rama ;  the  return  of  Shri  Rama 
to  Ayodhya ;  the  reunion  with  Prince  Bharata ;  the  crowning 
of  Shri  Rama  as  king ;  the  farewell  to  the  monkey  army ;  the 
rejoicings  of  his  subjects  at  the  coronation ;  the  repudiation  of  Sita ; 
these  and  all  the  other  deeds  of  Rama  on  earth  have  been  described 
in  the  sacred  poem  written  by  the  blessed  Valmiki  himself. 

M 


BALA    KAKDA 
CHAPTER    4 

Skri  Rama's  sons  chant  the  poem 

While  Shri  Rama  was  still  King  of  Ayodhya,  the  great  Sage 
Valmiki  composed  this  beautiful  classic. 

The  holy  rishi  composed  twenty-four  thousand  verses  and 
divided  them  into  five  hundred  chapters  and  six  books.  In 
addition,  he  composed  the  epilogue.  The  work  being  completed, 
he  reflected  thus :  "  To  whom  shall  I  teach  this  classic  ?  " 

While  the  sage  was  reflecting  on  the  matter,  the  two  princes, 
Kusha  and  Lava,  the  offspring  of  Rama  and  Sita  approached 
him  and  touched  his  feet  in  reverence.  The  great  sage  studied 
these  two  virtuous  princes  of  mellifluous  speech,  who  dwelt 
with  him  in  his  hermitage  at  that  time.  Knowing  them  to  be 
wise  and  full  of  faith  in  the  teachings  of  the  Vedas,  the  great 
sage,  who  had  expounded  the  meaning  of  the  scriptures  in  his 
verses,  taught  the  classic  to  them. 

The  great  Valmiki  taught  them  the  classic  describing  the 
deeds  of  Rama  and  Sita  and  all  that  relates  to  the  incidents 
leading  to  the  slaying  of  Ravana  named  "The  Slaying  of  the 
Grandson  of  Foulastya  'V  This  historical  classic  is  pleasant  to 
sing  and  adapted  to  the  three  measures  of  time,1  it  is  contained 
within  the  seven  notes  and  can  be  sung  to  the  vina.  It  expresses 
the  various  moods  of  love,  courage,  disgust,  anger,  terror, 
compassion,  wonder,  laughter  and  serenity. 

The  two  princes  were  skilled  musicians,  proficient  in  rhythm 
and  melody  and  had  sweet  voices ;  they  were  as  comely  to 
look  at  as  Gandharvas.3  Endowed  with  god-like  beauty,  the 
two  sweet  singers,  the  reflected  images  of  Shri  Rama  himself, 
constantly  repeated  the  holy  classic  and  committed  it  to 
memory.  The  two  adorable  and  charming  princes  skilfully 
recited  the  holy  classic,  the  Ramayana,  which  extols  virtues 
before  the  sages,  the  learned  brahmins  and  the  ascetics,  as  they 
had  been  instructed  to  do. 

*  Poulutya.  One  oftbc  seven  great  sages,  born  from  the  mind  of  Brahma,  the 
Creator. 

»  three  measures  of  time— «low,  medium,  quick. 

*  Gandharvas— celestial  musicians. 

15  c 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 

On  a  particular  occasion,  the  two  princes,  great-souled, 
fortunate,  and  equipped  with  all  good  qualities,  chanted  the 
great  epic  in  Shri  Rama's  assembly.  The  listening  sages  were 
visibly  moved  and  shed  tears  of  delight.  Being  overcome  with 
wonder,  they  cried  "  Excellent !  Excellent ",  and  praising 
the  two  singers,  the  virtue-loving  sages  experienced  great  joy. 
Showering  praises  on  the  brothers,  they  cried, "  How  melodiously 
you  sing!  How  exquisite  is  the  divine  poem,  the  story  of 
Rama!" 

Being  pleased  with  the  sweet  singers,  one  sage  presented  them 
with  loshtas,  another  with  delicious  fruits,  a  third  with  robes 
of  bark  and  another  with  antelope  skins  ;  some  gave  sacrificial 
thread,  some  vessels  for  collecting  alms,  others  gave  loin  cloths, 
kusha  grass,  garments  of  yellow  cloth,  scarves  and  thread  for 
binding  the  hair,  sacrificial  vessels,  rosaries  and  axes.  Others 
bestowed  their  blessings  upon  them,  saying  "  May  you  live 
long  "  and  all  acclaimed  the  author  of  the  marvellous  poem. 

They  said :  "  This  metre  will  be  the  foundation  of  the  verse 
of  future  poets ;  it  is  composed  according  to  specific  rules ; 
the  two  princes  have  sung  this  wonderful  poem  with  great  art ; 
it  will  promote  wisdom  in  those  who  listen  to  it  and  grant  them 
longevity  and  health ;  it  is  truly  able  to  charm  the  heart." 

While  the  sages  were  thus  praising  the  two  princes,  Shri 
Ramachandra,  passing  that  way,  took  them  to  his  royal  palace. 
Occupying  his  golden  throne,  Shri  Rama,  the  destroyer  of  his 
foes,  offered  hospitality  and  reverence  to  the  two  worthy  princes. 
In  the  assembly,  surrounded  by  his  ministers  and  brothers, 
Shri  Rama  looked  approvingly  on  those  handsome  and  learned 
youths,  and  addressed  the  Princes  Lakshmana,  Shatrughna 
and  Bharata  saying :  "  Hear  the  historical  poem,  which  these 
two  celestial  and  brilliant  minstrels  sing,  this  poem  which 
portrays  incidents  of  wonderful  meaning." 

Then  Shri  Rama  commanded  the  two  musicians  to  sing  and 
the  princes  tuned  their  vinas  and  chanted  the  poem  they  had 
learned,  sweetly  and  clearly.  The  whole  assembly  listened  to 
the  music  which  was  wholly  gratifying  to  the  mind  and  heart. 

Shri  Rama  said :  "  I  admire  the  music  and  the  verse  sung 
by  these  two  minstrels  who  appear  to  be  endowed  with  royal 
attributes." 

16 


BALA    KANDA 

In  this  way,  praised  and  encouraged  by  Shri  Ramachandra, 
the  two  brothers  demonstrating  their  skill  in  music,  sang  on. 
Listening  to  them  in  the  royal  assembly,  Shri  Ramachandra 
was  charmed. 


CHAPTER    5 

King  Dasaratka's  kingdom  and  capital 

The  earth  consisting  of  seven  islands  has  been  under  one  ruler 
since  the  time  of  those  kings  descended  from  Manu,1  who  were 
ever  victorious. 

Among  those  mighty  monarchs  was  Sagara  followed  by  his 
sixty  thousand  sons  who  hollowed  out  the  ocean.  This  classic 
Ramayana  contains  the  history  of  the  House  of  Sagara,  founded 
by  Ikshwaku.  This  Rama-Katha2  will  be  recited  from  beginning 
to  end — let  all  listen  to  it  with  faith. 

On  the  banks  of  the  river  Sarayu,  there  was  a  great  and 
prosperous  country  named  Koshala,  inhabited  by  contented 
people.  In  it  was  the  city  of  Ayodhya,  famous  in  the  three 
worlds,  founded  by  the  renowned  Manu,  a  lord  among  men. 
The  city's  thoroughfares  extended  for  sixty  miles ;  its  beauty 
was  enhanced  by  streets  admirably  planned,  the  principal 
highways  being  sprinkled  with  water  and  strewn  with  flowers. 

King  Dasaratha  protected  the  city  as  Maghavan3  protects 
Amaravati.*  He  dwelt  there  in  splendour,  as  Indra  in  heaven. 
The  dry  had  beautiful  and  massive  gates  and  charming  markets ; 
its  fortifications  were  planned  by  skilful  engineers  and  artificers. 
There  were  bards,  ballad  singers  and  public  musicians  in  the 
city;  the  inhabitants  were  wealthy  and  had  spacious  houses 
with  high  arched  porticos,  decorated  with  flags  and  banners. 
It  was  filled  with  extensive  buildings  and  beautiful  gardens, 

1  Manu  from  the  root  "man",  "to  think".    The  progenitor  of  mankind, 
created  by  Brahma. 

*  Rama-katha,    The  recitation  of  Ramayana. 

■  Maghavan.    A  title  of  the  Lord  Indra,  King  of  the  Celestials. 

*  Amaravati.    Lord  Indra'i  capital. 

17 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 

and  surrounded  by  mango  groves,  tall  trees  enhancing  the 
outskirts  of  the  city,  giving  it  the  appearance  of  a  beautiful  girl 
wearing  a  girdle  of  greenery.  The  city  was  enclosed  by  strong 
fortifications  and  a  deep  moat  which  no  enemy,  by  any  expedient 
whatsoever,  could  penetrate.  Countless  elephants,  horses,  cattle, 
camels  and  mules  were  to  be  seen  in  the  city.  Innumerable 
ambassadors  and  merchants  dwelt  there  and  people  from  many 
lands  traded  peacefully  within  its  walls. 

Ayodhya,  like  Indra's  Amaravati,  was  resplendent  with  gilded 
palaces,  die  walls  of  which  were  set  with  precious  stones,  the 
domes  resembling  mountain  peaks.  Gem-encrusted,  sky-kissing 
buildings  could  be  seen  throughout  the  royal  capital.  Dwelling 
houses,  tall  and  fair,  stood  in  well-placed  sites  and  resounded 
with  delightful  music.  There  were  lovely  dwellings  occupied 
by  men  of  noble  birth,  resembling  the  aerial  chariots  that  carry 
those  of  pure  life  and  spiritual  perfection  to  heaven. 

The  warriors  living  in  that  city  were  of  those  who  do  not 
slay  a  fleeing  foe,  they  were  skilled  archers,  able  to  pierce  a  target 
by  sound  alone.  Many  had  slain  tigers,  lions  and  wolves 
wandering  near  their  homes,  either  in  single  combat  or  with 
different  kinds  of  weapons.  This  great  city  which  harboured 
thousands  of  chieftains  was  built1  by  King  Dasaratha. 

In  Ayodhya  lived  countless  learned  men  engaged  in  the 
observance  of  rituals,  there  were  also  artists  and  craftsmen,  men 
deeply  read  in  the  Veda  and  those  endowed  with  every  virtue, 
full  of  truth  and  wisdom,  as  well  as  thousands  of  seers  and  sages 
versed  in  the  mystical  science  of  Yoga. 


CHAPTER    6 

The  city  of  Ayodhya 

There  dwelt  in  that  city,  King  Dasaratha,  a  follower  of  the 
tradition  of  the  illustrious  Emperor  Manu.  The  king  was 
learned  in  the  interpretation  of  the  Vedas,  his  chief  wealth  was 

1  It  is  implied  that  Manu  founded  the  original  city  on  thii  lite,  but  leveral  cities 
built  by  other  monarch*  succeeded  it. 


BALA  KANDA 
pre-eminence  in  truth  and  virtue ;  he  was  one  who  never  broke 
his  word,  who  was  ever  prudent,  majestic  and  beloved  of  his 
subjects,  a  great  charioteer,  a  worthy  descendant  of  the  dynasty 
of  Ikshwaku,  an  observer  of  many  sacrifices,  one  who  ever 
delighted  in  the  practice  of  righteousness ;  in  full  authority 
over  his  people,  equal  to  a  great  sage ;  a  royal  seer,  renowned 
in  the  three  worlds,  triumphing  over  his  enemies,  a  friend  to  all ; 
having  perfect  control  of  his  senses  and  appetites  ;  in  prosperity 
equal  to  Indra ;  in  wealth  equal  to  Kuvera, 

That  truth-loving  monarch,  striving  to  acquire  perfection  in 
virtue,  worldly  prosperity  and  happiness,  ruled  the  city  as  the 
celestial  monarch  Indra  rules  Amaravati. 

The  people  in  that  city  were  happy,  virtuous,  learned, 
experienced,  each  satisfied  with  his  state,  practising  his  own 
calling,  without  avarice  and  of  truthful  speech.  None  was 
indigent  or  dwelt  in  a  mean  habitation ;  all  lived  happily  with 
their  families,  possessing  wealth,  grain,  cattle  and  horses.  In 
that  city  of  Ayodhya,  none  was  a  miser  or  a  swindler,  none  was 
mean-spirited,  proud,  rash,  worthless  or  an  atheist.  Men  and 
women  were  of  righteous  conduct,  fully  self-controlled,  and  in 
their  pure  and  chaste  behaviour  they  equalled  the  great  sages. 
None  lacked  earrings,  coronets  and  necklaces.  They  bathed 
daily  and  rubbed  their  bodies  with  oil,  using  attar  of  roses  and 
sandal  paste.  None  ate  impure  food,  none  allowed  his  neighbour 
to  suffer  hunger.  All  possessed  ornaments  and  gold,  and  there 
was  none  who  had  not  learnt  to  subdue  his  mind.  No  one 
in  the  city  neglected  to  offer  butter  and  fragrant  objects  in  the 
sacrificial  fire.  No  one  was  mean,  impious  or  failed  to  discharge  his 
duties ;  there  were  no  thieves  and  none  were  born  of  mixed  castes. 

The  brahmins  were  devoted  to  their  respective  duties,  firm 
in  self-control  and  authorized  to  accept  gifts.  None  denied 
the  existence  of  God,  none  uttered  falsehood  or  were  enamoured 
of  worldly  pleasure  and  none  was  guilty  of  slander.  No  brahmin 
was  unversed  in  the  six  systems  of  philosophy  nor  did  any 
neglect  to  fast  at  the  full  moon,  or  on  other  appointed  days ; 
there  were  none  who  suffered  from  mental  or  physical  infirmities 
and  none  were  unhappy  in  that  city. 

Among  the  inhabitants,  there  were  no  revolutionaries  and 
none  who  were  not  loyal  to  king  and  state.    Those  who  dwelt 
19 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 
there,  worshipped  the  gods  and  the  uninvited  guest ;  they  were 
both  magnanimous  and  charitable. 

All  attained  a  ripe  age  as  virtuous  and  truth-loving  people ; 
their  homes  were  filled  with  children,  grandchildren  and  virtuous 
women.  The  warriors  were  subject  to  the  learned  brahmins 
and  the  merchants  to  the  warrior  caste ;  in  accordance  with 
their  caste  the  people  served  the  brahmins,  the  warriors  and 
the  merchants. 

In  the  administration  of  the  empire,  the  Emperor  Dasaratha 
followed  the  example  of  the  first  ruler  Mama  who  was  supreme 
in  wisdom  and  a  god  among  men. 

Ayodhya  abounded  in  warriors,  undefeated  in  battle,  fearless 
and  skilful  in  the  use  of  arms,  resembling  lions  guarding  their 
mountain  caves. 

There  were  horses  in  the  city  from  Kamroja,  Vanaya,  Nudi 
and  Vahli,  and  elephants  from  the  regions  of  Vindhu  and  Hrmavat. 

The  city  of  Ayodhya  was  full  of  courageous  and  noble  men 
belonging  to  the  races  of  Bhadra,  Mulla  and  Mriga,  inhabitants 
of  the  regions  of  Binchyachala  and  the  Himalayan  ranges. 

The  city  possessed  mighty  elephants  like  great  hills.  That 
capital  was  truly  worthy  of  the  name  '  Ayodhya,'  which  means 
"  The  city  none  can  challenge  in  warfare  ". 

Dwelling  there,  the  Emperor  Dasaratha,  ruling  the  kingdom, 
resembled  the  moon  in  the  midst  of  countless  stars.  That 
great  king,  equal  to  Indra  himself,  reigned  over  the  city, 
guarded  by  fortifications  and  ramparts,  a  city  which  contained 
innumerable  dwellings  of  many  kinds  and  thousands  of  prosper-' 
ous  inhabitants. 


chapter   7 

The  administration  of  the  kingdom 

Ever  devoted  to  the  welfare  of  King  Dasaratha,  the  ministers 
of  the  House  of  Ikshwaku  were  possessed  of  all  the  virtues ; 
their  counsels  were  based  on  truth  and  they  understood  the 
import  of  the  royal  commands  immediately. 
20 


BALA    KANDA 

Eight  of  the  long's  counsellors  were  famed;  untiringly 
employed  in  the  affairs  of  state,  they  were  honest  and  devoted 
to  the  cultivation  of  virtue.  Their  names  were  Dhristi,  Jayanta, 
Vijaja,  Siddhartha,  Atyartha-Sadaka,  Ashoka,  Mantra-pala  and 
Sumantra. 

The  great  and  holy  sages,  Vasishtha  and  Vamadeva  assisted 
the  king  in  his  observance  of  spiritual  duties  and  also  acted  as 
his  advisers. 

All  the  ministers  were  virtuous,  scorning  to  do  wrong, 
benevolent,  versed  in  the  moral  law,  of  wide  experience,  dis- 
interested, magnanimous,  acquainted  with  the  spirit  of  the 
scriptures,  forbearing,  patient,  obedient  to  the  king,  true  to  their 
word,  cheerful,  free  from  avarice  and  well  acquainted  with  the 
affairs  of  their  fellow  subjects  and  with  those  of  the  subjects 
of  other  monarchs.  They  were  efficient,  firm  in  friendship, 
and  even  passed  judgment  on  their  own  sons  if  they  broke 
the  law. 

These  counsellors  were  expert  in  the  science  of  economics  and 
warfare,  and  never  inflicted  unmerited  punishment  on  an  enemy. 
They  were  brave  and  unambitious.  Conversant  with  every 
branch  of  political  life,  they  protected  all  those  who  lived  in 
the  state.  Adding  to  the  royal  treasury  without  burdening  the 
learned  and  the  warriors,  they  inflicted  penalties  on  wrongdoers 
with  due  regard  to  their  capacity  for  bearing  it.  These  ministers 
were  pure  of  heart  and  of  chaste  conduct.  None  consorted 
with  his  neighbour's  wife,  none  were  wicked  and  all  lived 
together  peaceably.  Cultivating  every  good  quality  and  prac- 
tising the  various  arts,  they  were  renowned  for  their  courage, 
their  fair  name  was  published  abroad  and  their  lives  were  guided 
by  reason.  Skilled  in  the  laws  of  the  country  and  blessed  with 
wealth,  they  issued  wise  edicts  and  exercised  their  minds  in 
philosophical  debate. 

Acquainted  with  the  moral  code,  they  conversed  affectionately 
with  each  other ;  such  were  King  Dasaratha's  ministers  who, 
informed  by  their  agents  of  the  needs  of  the  people,  satisfied 
them  and  governed  with  prudence. 

In  the  administration  of  his  kingdom,  the  king  never  permitted 
unrighteousness  to  cause  dissension,  and  became  known  through- 
out the  world  as  an  ocean  of  truth.    That  lion  among  men 


THE  RAMAYANA  OF  VALMJKI 
King  Dasaratha,  reigning  over  the  earth,  had  none  superior 
or  equal  to  himself.  Honoured  by  his  feudal  lords,  surrounded 
by  friends,  King  Dasaratha,  like  Indra,  reigned  in  majesty. 
Benevolent,  powerful,  accomplished  and  gracious,  King 
Dasaratha  protected  Ayodhya  and  shone  in  splendour  like  the 
sun  illumining  the  world. 


CHAPTER    8 

The  king  desires  to  perform  a  sacrifice  for  the  birth  of  a  son 

King  Dasaratha,  that  glorious  and  righteous  king,  though 
performing  great  austerities,  was  without  an  heir  to  the  throne. 
Then  the  wise  and  great-souled  monarch  said  to  himself :  "  I 
will  perform  the  horse-sacrifice  (Aswa-medha)1  in  order  to  have 
a  son." 

Having  thus  decided,  the  supremely  sagacious  sovereign 
convened  a  meeting  of  his  counsellors  and  addressing  his  chief 
minister,  Sumantra,  commanded  him  as  follows :  "  Send 
speedily  for  the  spiritual  preceptors  and  priests."  Quick  to  act, 
Sumantra  at  once  summoned  those  highly  learned  preceptors 
and  brought  thither  Suyagna,  Vamadeva,  Javali,  Kasyapa 
and  Vasishtha  together  with  other  eminent  priests  and 
brahmins. 

Having  offered  salutations  to  these  holy  men,  King  Dasaratha, 
speaking  in  gracious  accents,  uttered  words  full  of  truth  and 
purpose :  He  said,  "O  Sages,  I  have  practised  virtue  and  yet 
I  have  not  had  the  good  fortune  to  be  blessed  with  a  son ; 
it  is  therefore  my  intention  to  perform  the  horse-sacrifice.  I 
wish  to  act  according  to  the  injunction  of  the  scriptures ;  you, 
O  Holy  Men,  advise  me  after  due  deliberation  as  to  how  I  can 
be  successful  in  the  proposed  undertaking  ". 

1  Aswa-Medha.  A  sacrifice,  which  in  Vedic  times  was  performed  by  king*. 
A  hone,  being  consecrated  by  certain  ceremonies,  was  let  loose  and  allowed 
to  wander  at  will  followed  by  warriors  ;  the  ruler  of  any  country  the  animal 
entered  was  bound  to  fight  or  submit ;  finally  the  horse  was  sacrificed  with 
special  rite*. 

22 


BALA    KANDA 

The  learned  brahmins,  led  by  Shri  Vasishtha,  praised  the 
king's  intention  and  said :  "  Thou  hast  decided  on  the  proper 
course,  O  King."  Highly  pleased,  they  commanded  those 
things  requisite  for  the  sacrifice  to  be  assembled  and  the  horse 
loosed.  They  said,  "  O  King,  let  a  place  of  sacrifice  be 
chosen  on  the  north  bank  of  the  river  Sarayu.  O  King, 
this  holy  resolve  formed  by  thee,  for  the  sake  of  an  heir,  will 
assuredly  bring  the  fulfilment  of  thy  desire  ". 

Hearing  the  words  of  the  brahmins,  the  monarch  rejoiced  and 
commanded  his  ministers  to  bring  the  sacrificial  appointments 
and  release  the  horse  under  the  protection  of  the  warriors  j1 
they  were  also  directed  to  erect  a  sacrificial  pavilion  on  the  bank 
of  the  river  Sarayu.  He  further  decreed  the  adoption  of  those 
measures  which  would  dimmish  the  possibility  of  hindrance  to 
the  sacrifice,  for  even  for  kings,  the  horse-sacrifice  was  not  easily 
performed. 

The  king  said :  "  Let  it  be  remembered  that  during  the 
observance  of  the  sacrifice,  no  suffering  must  be  inflicted  on  any, 
lest  some  perverse  and  crafty  brahmin  should  cause  obstruction 
in  the  proceedings.  By  carrying  through  the  ritual  without 
regard  for  scriptural  injunctions,  it  comes  to  nought ;  therefore, 
bring  the  sacrifice  to  a  successful  conclusion.  I  depend  on  you, 
and  expect  you  to  carry  the  sacrifice  through  to  a  successful 
issue." 

The  counsellors  replied,  saying, "  O  King,  be  it  so  ". 

Blessing  the  monarch,  the  learned  brahmins  retired,  and  the 
king  addressed  his  ministers  saying :  "  Prepare  the  sacrifice  as 
the  officiating  priests  have  instructed  you  and  accept  responsibil- 
ity for  its  final  success." 

Then  the  illustrious  sovereign  left  the  court  and  entered  his 
private  apartments  where  the  queens  dwelt,  who  loved  the  king 
from  the  depths  of  their  hearts. 

King  Dasaratha  addressed  them,  saying :  "  I  intend  to  observe 
a  sacrifice  for  the  sake  of  obtaining  a  son,  do  you  all  follow 
die  prescribed  discipline."  The  queens  rejoiced  to  hear  these 
words  from  the  lips  of  the  king  and  their  lotus-like  faces 
brightened  like  flowers  on  the  departure  of  the  cold  season. 

1  See  note  on  page  22. 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 

CHAPTER    9 

Sumanira  relates  a  tradition  that  a  son  will  be  born 
through  the  help  of  the  Sage  Risky  asringa 

Sumantra,  having  heard  of  the  preparations  tor  the  sacrifice, 
obtained  a  private  audience  with  his  sovereign  and  said :  "  I 
have  heard  of  a  tradition,  formerly  related  to  me  by  the  august 
brahmins.  O  King,  in  ancient  days,  the  blessed  Sanatkumara 
predicted  to  the  holy  sages  around  him  that  a  son  would  be 
born  to  thee. 

It  was  prophesied  that  a  son  of  Kasyapa,  named  Vibhandaka 
would  have  a  son  called  Rishyasringa  and  that  he  should  dwell 
in  the  forest  alone  with  his  saintly  father,  unknown  to  any  other 
man  or  woman. 

This  sage  would  keep  the  twofold  vow  of  brahmacharya 
enjoined  by  the  sages.  In  this  way  he  would  pass  a  long  time 
worshipping  God  through  the  fire-sacrifice  and  the  service  of 
his  sire. 

In  the  country  named  Anga,  a  famous  king  named  Lomapada, 
would  oppress  the  people  by  his  evil  way  of  life  and  thus  cause 
a  drought.  On  account  of  this,  the  king  would  suffer  great 
affliction  and  summoning  the  brahmins  would  say  to  them: 
"  O  Wise  Men,  acquainted  as  you  are  with  the  customs  of  the 
world  and  also  the  divine  laws,  tell  me  what  ritual  of  purification 
and  repentance  I  can  adopt  to  expiate  my  evil  deeds,  which 
have  brought  about  this  drought." 

Then  the  brahmins,  learned  in  the  Veda,  would  answer  the 
king  thus :  "  O  King,  exert  thyself  by  every  means  to  bring 
the  son  of  the  Sage  Vibhandaka  hither.  Having  with  due 
reverence  conveyed  him  hither,  do  thou  confer  thy  daughter 
Shanta  on  him  in  marriage." 

The  king  having  listened  to  their  words  and  reflected  on  how 
he  should  bring  that  excellent  sage  to  the  court,  would  then 
request  his  ministers  and  priests  to  approach  the  sage,  but  they 
would  declare  their  unwillingness  to  undertake  the  mission* 
being  afraid  of  the  rishi's  power. 
In  order  to  avoid  the  monarch's  displeasure,  however,  after 


BALA    KANDA 

deliberating  on  the  method  by  which  the  sage  could  be  brought 
to  the  court,  they  would  make  the  following  proposal :  "  By 
the  courtesans  can  the  sage  be  persuaded  to  come  to  the  king's 
court,  the  rains  will  then  follow  and  the  drought  will  be  at  an 
end.  Then  will  the  king  join  his  daughter  in  marriage  to  the 
sage.  By  pouring  oblations  into  the  sacrificial  fire  the  illustrious 
sage,  Rishyasringa,  will,  by  his  grace,  obtain  the  desired  son 
for  King  Dasaratha." 

"  Thus  spoke  the  illustrious  Sanatkumara,  in  the  midst  of 
the  sages,  and  I  have  now  recounted  it  to  thee." 

King  Dasaratha  was  delighted  to  hear  these  words,  and 
requested  the  minister  to  describe  further  how  King  Lomapada 
brought  the  sage  to  his  court 


CHAPTER     10 

He  describes  horn  Rishyasringa  was  brought  to  King 
Lomapada's  court 

Thus  requested,  Sumantra  began  to  narrate  the  story  in  detail 
and  said :  "  O  Great  King,  hear  how  the  ministers  brought 
the  Sage  Rishyasringa  to  the  court. 

"  The  ministers  addressed  King  Lomapada  saying  :  *  We  have 
a  plan  whereby  the  young  sage  may  be  conveyed  hither 
successfully.  He  resides  in  the  forest,  devoted  to  holy  study, 
spiritual  practices  and  asceticism,  and  is  wholly  unacquainted 
with  the  pursuit  of  pleasure. 

'* '  By  the  means  of  those  things  gratifying  to  the  senses, 
we  shall  most  certainly  be  able  to  bring  the  sage  to  the  court. 
Let  beautifully-attired  and  lovely  courtesans  go  there  and  by 
their  acts,  charm  and  bring  him  hither '." 

The  king  approved  the  plan  and  commanded  his  ministers 
to  carry  it  out. 

The  courtesans  then  entered  the  forest  and  took  up  their 
abode  near  the  hermitage,  seeking  a  meeting  with  the  young 
sage.  Protected  by  his  father,  the  youthful  ascetic  seldom 
*5 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 

passed  the  boundaries  of  the  hermitage,  nor  had  he  seen  any 
man  or  woman  beyond  its  precincts. 

One  day,  impelled  by  destiny,  the  youth  went  forth  from 
the  hermitage  and  beheld  the  graceful  and  beautiful  women, 
attired  in  many-coloured  robes  of  exquisite  design,  singing 
sweetly.  They  approached  the  son  of  Rishi  Vibhandaka  and 
addressed  him,  saying :  "Who  art  thou?  Whose  son  art  thou  ? 
What  is  thy  name?  Why  dost  thou  dwell  in  the  dark 
forest  ?  " 

Never  having  beheld  women  of  beauty  and  charm  before, 
Rishyasringa  was  captivated  and  answered  them,  saving :  "  My 
father  is  the  great  Sage  Vibhandaka  of  the  family  of  Kasyapa 
and  I  am  his  son,  my  name  is  Rishyasringa.  O  Beautiful  Beings 
of  charming  mien,  my  hermitage  is  near  at  hand,  please  come 
thither  and  allow  me  to  oner  you  hospitality  there." 

The  courtesans  accepted  the  invitation  and  accompanied  the 
sage  who  received  them  in  the  traditional  manner,  placing  before 
them  water  to  wash  their  feet  and  delicious  roots  and  fruits. 

Fearing  the  father's  return  and  anxious  to  depart  with  all  haste, 
the  courtesans  plied  the  young  sage  with  tasty  confections 
which  they  had  brought  with  them,  saying :  "  Be  pleased  to 
accept  these  dainties  which  we  have  brought  for  thee  to  enjoy 
on  this  occasion."  They  then  caressed  the  youth,  feeding  him 
with  sweets  and  other  delicacies. 

The  resplendent  sage  partook  of  the  offerings,  thinking  them 
to  be  fruits,  never  having  tasted  any  other  food. 

The  courtesans,  fearing  the  father's  return,  pretended  to  be 
fasting  and  left  the  hermitage.  At  their  departure,  the  youth- 
ful sage  felt  dejected  and  restless. 

The  following  day,  the  courtesans,  charmingly  attired,  again 
went  to  the  hermitage  and  smiled  on  perceiving  the  young  sage 
appear  so  disconsolate.  They  then  approached  him  and  said  : 
"  O  Handsome  Youth,  to-day  please  grace  our  hermitage  with 
thy  presence.  O  Auspicious  One,  we  can  entertain  thee  better 
there  than  here." 

The  young  sage  agreed  to  accompany  them  and  went  with 
them  to  their  abode.  As  the  sage  entered  the  city,  Indra 
showered  rain  on  the  domain  of  King  Lomapada  and  the  people 
rejoiced. 

26 


BALA    KANDA 

When  the  tain  began  to  fall,  King  Lomapada,  realising  that 
the  holy  sage  had  entered  the  city,  went  out  to  meet  him. 
Offering  him  humble  and  loving  salutations,  he  presented  him 
with  the  traditional  gifts  (arghya)1  of  water  and  food,  and 
entreated  him  to  grant  the  boon  that  bis  father  Vibhandaka 
should  not  visit  his  displeasure  on  him. 

The  king  then  took  the  youth  to  the  inner  apartments  and 
united  him  in  marriage  to  his  daughter  Shanta. 

Deeply  revered  by  the  king,  Rishyasringa  lived  happily  in 
the  capital  with  bis  bride,  the  Princess  Shanta. 


chapter    zi 

King  Dasaraiha  goes  to  King  Lomapada,  by  whose  permission 
Rishyasringa  comes  to  Ayodhya 

Sumantra  said :  "  O  Great  King,  hearken  further  to  the  words 
of  the  great  Sage  Sanatkumara : — 

"  '  In  the  House  of  Ikshwaku,  there  will  be  a  highly  righteous 
and  truth-loving  king  named  Dasaratha  who  will  form  an  alliance 
with  King  Lomapada  of  Anga. 

"  *  King  Dasaratha  will  approach  his  friend  Lomapada  and 
beg  the  assistance  of  Rishyasringa,  the  husband  of  the  Princess 
Shanta,  in  the  performance  of  the  sacrifice  he  desires  to  observe, 
that  he  may  be  blessed  with  a  son.  After  mature  consideration, 
King  Lomapada  will  permit  Shanta's  lord,  Rishyasringa  to 
accompany  King  Dasaratha.  Highly  gratified,  King  Dasaratha 
will  return  to  his  capital  with  Rishyasringa  and  will  ask  the  sage 
to  officiate  at  the  sacrifice  he  is  about  to  perform  in  order  to 
obtain  sons  and  also  a  future  abode  in  the  celestial  regions. 

"  'As  a  result  of  the  sacrifice,  King  Dasaratha  will  have  four 
sons,  each  of  limitless  valour.  These  sons  will  be  renowned 
throughout  the  world  and  will  increase  the  glory  of  their 
dynasty.' 

1  Arghya.  A  ceremonial  offering  of  water,  milk  and  kusha  grass,  rice,  durva, 
•andalwood,  flowers,  etc 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 

"  This  story  was  narrated  by  the  Sage  Sanatkumara  in  the 
first  quarter  of  Satya-Yuga.1  O  Great  King !  Thou  shouldst 
approach  Rishyasringa  with  a  worthy  chariot  and  retinue,  and 
bring  him  with  ceremony  to  thy  capital." 

Having  heard  the  good  counsel  of  his  minister  Sumantra, 
the  King  commanded  him  to  inform  his  Guru  Vasishtha  of 
this  matter,  and  the  holy  Vasishtha  acquiesced  in  the  plan. 

Then  the  king,  with  firm  resolve,  attended  by  his  queens, 
counsellors  and  priests,  prepared  to  set  forth  for  the  city  where 
Rishyasringa  dwelt.  Passing  through  various  forests  and 
traversing  many  rivers,  the  king  arrived  at  Lomapada's  capital. 
There  he  beheld  the  resplendent  sage,  in  lustre  like  a  glowing 
fire,  seated  near  King  Lomapada. 

Inspired  by  friendship,  the  great  monarch  Lomapada  offered 
respectful  salutations  to  King  Dasaratha  and  informed  Rishyas- 
ringa of  his  alliance  with  this  king,  whereupon  the  sage  expressed 
his  approval  in  words  of  praise. 

Having  enjoyed  the  hospitality  of  King  Lomapada  for  seven 
days,  King  Dasaratha  addressed  him  thus :  "  O  King,  I  desire 
to  enter  upon  an  important  undertaking,  be  gracious  enough 
to  allow  thy  daughter  Shanta  and  her  lord  to  return  to  my 
capital  to  assist  me." 

Hearing  these  words,  King  Lomapada  replied :  "  Be  it  so," 
and  turning  to  the  sage  said  :  "  Be  pleased  to  go  with  thy  wife 
to  the  capital  of  King  Dasaratha." 

The  youthful  sage  assented  to  the  command  of  King  Loma- 
pada, and  he,  in  company  with  his  spouse,  departed  with  King 
Dasaratha. 

Having  taken  leave  of  his  friend,  King  Dasaratha  despatched 
speedy  messengers  to  go  before  him  to  instruct  his  ministers 
to  prepare  for  their  arrival. 

The  people  of  Ayodhya  carried  out  all  as  they  had  been 
commanded  and  overjoyed  at  the  monarch's  return,  fulfilled 
the  instructions  of  his  messengers.  The  citizens  were  delighted 
to  behold  the  young  sage  entering  the  city  and  being  honoured 
by  the  king,  as  Indra  in  heaven  pays  tribute  to  Kasyapa. 

Having  introduced  the  sage  and  his  consort  to  the  inner 

1  Satya-Yuga — the  Golden  Age.  There  are  four  yugas  in  the  world  cycle — 
Satya  or  Krita,  Tf  eta,  Dwapara  and  Kali,  the  golden,  silver,  copper,  arid  iron  age. 

28 


BALA    KANDA 

apartments,  the  king  offered  him  the  traditional  welcome  as 
enjoined  in  the  scriptures. 

The  royal  ladies  also  welcomed  the  wide-eyed  Shanta  with 
her  lord  to  the  private  apartments,  and  expressed  their  pleasure 
and  delight. 

Honoured  and  worshipped  by  the  queens,  no  less  than  by 
King  Dasaratha  himself,  the  Princess  Shanta  and  her  husband, 
the  sage,  dwelt  in  the  palace  as  Brihaspati1  resides  in  the  city 
of  Mahendra. 


CHAPTER      12 

Rishyasringa  agrees  to  assist  in  the  sacrifice 

Time  passed  and  the  spring  came  again  while  the  holy  sage 
was  at  the  court  of  King  Dasaratha.  On  a  propitious  day, 
the  king  decided  to  enter  upon  the  sacrifice. 

He  approached  Rishyasringa  and,  bowing  low,  offered  saluta- 
tions to  him,  inviting  that  god-like  sage  to  assist  in  the  sacrifice 
he  was  observing,  to  preserve  the  dynasty.  The  sage  agreed 
and  requested  the  king  to  provide  the  necessary  material  for  the 
sacrifice  and  to  let  loose  the  horse. 

The  sovereign  commanded  his  minister  Sumantra  to  summon 
with  all  speed  the  priests  acquainted  with  the  philosophy  of 
the  Veda,  and  sent  invitations  to  the  sages  Vamadeva,  Javali, 
Kasyapa,  the  high  priest  Vasishtha  and  other  exalted  and  learned 
brahmins. 

Sumantra,  setting  out  in  haste,  approached  the  sages  court- 
eously and  brought  them  to  the  king.  The  virtuous  monarch, 
after  paying  respectful  homage  to  them,  addressed  them  humbly, 
speaking  words  full  of  candour  and  integrity. 

He  said :  "  O  Sages,  despite  my  ardent  desire  to  have  an  heir, 
I  am  without  one.  I  have,  therefore,  decided  to  perform  the 
horse  sacrifice  to  that  end.  I  desire  the  sacrifice  to  be  observed 
according  to  the  scriptural  laws  and  through  the  grace  of  the 
Sage  Rishyasringa,  I  hope  to  attain  my  purpose." 

1  Brihaapati.    The  Guru  of  the  god*,  also  the  regent  of  the  planet  Jupiter. 
29 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 

The  sages  advised  the  king  to  gather  together  the  sacrificial 
articles  and  to  release  the  horse. 

They  said  :  "  Righteous  is  thy  desire  to  be  blessed  with  a 
son ;  O  King,  thou  shall  surely  obtain  four  illustrious  sons  of 
limitless  valour." 

The  brahmins'  words  convinced  the  king  that  heirs  would  be 
granted  to  him  and  he  communicated  his  satisfaction  to  his 
ministers.  He  said :  "  O  Counsellors,  bring  together  four  high 
priests  and  set  the  horse  at  liberty  under  the  protection  of  four 
hundred  warriors.  Let  a  sacrificial  pavilion  be  set  up  on  the 
bank  of  the  river  Sarayu,  and  let  appropriate  protective  rites 
be  observed  lest  obstructions  arise." 

The  king  then  ordained  that  during  the  period  of  sacrifice 
neither  priests  nor  other  persons  should  be  subject  to  any 
suffering  whatsoever.  He  said :  "  In  such  rites,  others  have 
been  impeded  by  sub-human  beings,  which  has  resulted  in  the 
annulment  of  the  sacrifice.  You  should,  therefore,  employ 
every  means  to  bring  the  sacrifice  to  a  successful  con- 
clusion." 

Hearing  the  words  of  the  king,  the  ministers— highly  gratified 
— began  to  act  according  to  bis  instructions.  Then  the  brahmins 
assured  the  king  that  the  sacrifice  would  be  accomplished 
without  hindrance  and  offering  him  obeisance,  returned  to  their 
homes. 

The  brahmins  having  departed,  the  king  bade  farewell  to 
his  ministers  and  entered  his  private  apartments. 


CHAPTER     13 

The  Sacrifice  is  commenced 

The  following  year,  spring  having  returned  once  more,  the  king, 
desiring  to  complete  the  sacrifice  for  the  sake  of  an  heir,  paid 
homage  to  Shri  Vasishtha,  offering  him  humble  salutations 
according  to  the  prescribed  ordinance,  and  addressed  that  great 
brahmin  with  submission,  saying : — 
30. 


BALA    KANDA 

"  O  Great  Sage,  be  pleased  to  complete  the  holy  ceremony 
according  to  the  sacred  tradition.  Let  it  be  so  undertaken  that 
no  interference  may  take  place.  Thou  art  compassionate  and 
thy  heart  is  inclined  towards  me.  Thou  art  also  my  Guru, 
the  burden  of  the  sacrifice  must  be  borne  by  thee." 

The  most  excellent  sage  replied,  "  Be  it  so.  I  will  do  as 
thou  desirest." 

Hereafter,  Shri  Vasishtha  summoned  those  brahmins,. able 
to  perform  the  holy  rituals  and  also  artificers,  architects,  writers, 
actors  and  dancers. 

Addressing  the  learned  priests,  he  said :  "At  the  king's 
command,  inaugurate  the  great  sacrifice.  Cause  bricks  in 
thousands  to  be  brought  hither  with  all  speed  and  erect  many 
kinds  of  dwellings,  well  arranged,  furnished  with  food  and 
every  comfort  to  accommodate  royal  and  other  guests.  Prepare 
hundreds  of  beautiful  houses  on  suitable  sites,  together  with 
provisions  and  all  things  needed  by  brahmins ;  erect  also  large 
buildings  for  the  people  of  other  lands,  and  store  food  and 
articles  of  comfort  where  it  is  best  to  do  so.  Fine  and  well- 
equipped  houses  should  be  built  for  villagers.  Ensure  that 
hospitality  in  the  form  of  food  and  refreshment  be  given  with 
courtesy  and  kindness.  Those  attending  the  sacrifice  should 
be  entertained  with  respect  and  consideration,  being  received 
in  a  becoming  manner,  according  to  their  caste.  Let  no  affront 
be  offered  to  any  through  greed,  anger  or  lust.  Let  craftsmen 
and  servants  be  suitably  regarded,  so  that  their  hearts  be  set 
on  their  task  and  let  no  one  act  disruptively.  Treat  all  in 
a  spirit  of  goodwill  and  courtesy,  ,so  that  the  work  may  be 
successfully  accomplished." 

The  people  listened  to  the  holy  sage  and  answered,  "  We 
will  act  according  to  thy  instructions,  O  Sage,  nothing  shall 
be  omitted." 

Shri  Vasishtha  then  summoned  the  chief  minister  Sumantra 
and  said :  "  Send  out  invitations  to  the  sacrifice  to  all  the 
righteous  kings  of  the  earth  and  also  the  brahmins,  kshatriyas, 
vaishyas  and  shudras  of  every  country,  but  go  first  to  the  great 
Sovereign  of  Mithila,  the  heroic  Janaka,  eminent  in  truth,  the 
greatest  of  warriors  and  a  knower  of  the  Veda,  since  he  is  an 
ancient  ally  of  King  Dasaratha.    Thereafter,  bring  the  ever- 

31  T> 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 

truthful  King  of  Kashi,  of  exemplary  conducts  equal  to  a  god  ; 
and  then  the  aged  and  virtuous  King  of  Kaikeya,  our  sovereign's 
father-in-law,  and  invite  his  son  also.  Call  the  fortunate  King 
Lomapada  of  Anga,  the  intimate  friend  of  the  King,  and  bring 
hither,  with  respect,  Koshala,  the  King  of  Magadha. 

"  Thereafter,  send  messengers  to  the  kings  of  the  eastern 
countries  of  Sindhu,  Souriva,  and  Sourashtra,  and  the  monarchs 
of  the  south,  with  other  great  kings  of  the  earth ;  let  them  come 
with  their  brothers,  relations,  retainers  and  servants." 

Having  heard  the  words  of  Shri  Vasishtha,  Sumantra  carried 
out  the  instructions  given  by  him,  dispatching  invitations  by 
special  messengers  to  the  monarchs  of  many  lands,  himself  going 
forth  to  escort  some  of  the  great  kings. 

Sumantra  having  departed,  all  the  workers  employed  in  the 
sacrifice  informed  the  holy  sage  of  their  progress,  and  he  advised 
them  further  saying :  "  Let  nothing  be  presented  to  any 
without  due  respect,  even  in  jest ;  gifts  given  with  contempt 
lead  to  the  destruction  of  the  giver." 

A  few  days  later,  the  kings  from  afar  arrived  at  the  sacrificial 
pavilion  bearing  gifts  of  gems. 

Then  Shri  Vasishtha,  being  pleased,  said :  "  O  King,  at  thy 
command,  all  the  kings  have  come  and  been  received  by  me 
with  due  hospitality.  The  preparations  for  the  sacrifice  are 
now  completed,  be  pleased  to  enter  the  sacrificial  pavilion  and 
inspect  the  articles  needed  for  the  ceremony.  See  how  well 
thy  servants  have  furnished  everything  requisite  and  have 
gratified  thy  every  wish." 

On  the  recommendation  of  the  Sage  Vasishtha  and  Rishyas- 
ringa,  King  Dasaratha  went  to  the  sacrificial  ground  at  an 
auspicious  time,  when  a  propitious  star  was  in  the  ascendant. 
Then  the  learned  brahmins  and  Shri  Vasishtha  elected  Rishyas- 
ringa  as  chief  priest. 

The  sacrifice  began  in  accordance  with  the  ancient  ordinance 
and  the  king,  with  his  queens,  engaged  in  the  preUminary 
initiations. 


32 


BALA    KANDA 
CHAPTER     14 

The  Ceremonies  are  performed  with  the  appropriate  rites 

Having  ranged  far  and  wide  during  a  year,  the  horse  returned 
and  on  the  bank  of  the  river  Sarayu  the  sacrifice  of  King 
Dasaratha  continued.  The  chief  priests,  under  Rishyasringa, 
assisted  the  king  in  the  observance  of  the  rituals.  Brahmins 
learned  in  the  ancient  science,  also  officiated  and  assisted  the  king 
according  to  the  instructions  laid  down  in  the  Kalpa  Sutra. 

The  two  special  portions  of  the  sacrifice  Pravargya  and 
Upasada  were  duly  observed ;  then  the  brahmins  worshipped 
the  gods  with  joy.  The  illustrious  sage  performed  certain  rituals 
and  offered  India  the  part  of  the  sacrifice  due  to  him.  There- 
after all  partook  of  the  soma-juice  which  destroys  every  sin. 

The  high-souled  king  duly  undertook  the  third  portion  of 
the  ceremony  with  the  assistance  of  the  holy  brahmins.  In 
the  sacrifice,  no  oblation  was  omitted  and  none  wrongly  offered 
in  the  sacred  fire.  All  that  was  done  was  correctly  carried  out 
under  the  supervision  of  the  sages. 

During  the  period  of  sacrifice,  no  brahmin  experienced  hunger 
or  thirst.  Countless  priests  were  present  and  each  was  attended 
by  hundreds  of  disciples.  Workers,  servants  and  other  classes 
were  feasted  like  the  brahmins,  and  monks  and  ascetics  were 
provided  for  abundantly. 

The  aged,  the  children,  and  the  women  were  served  with  all 
they  cared  to  eat,  and  those  who  attended  on  them  were  willing 
and  pleasant. 

By  the  king's  command,  apparel,  money  and  other  gifts  were 
freely  distributed  with  immeasurable  generosity.  Mountains 
of  cooked  and  uncooked  foods  were  to  be  seen  and  each  could 
have  what  he  required,  to  suit  his  needs.  Men  and  women 
from  many  lands  were  daily  entertained  with  food  and  drink. 
From  every  side,  the  king  heard  the  exclamations  "How  delicious 
is  the  food,  we  are  well  content ". 

Servants  and  retainers  gorgeously  clad  and  wearing  golden 
earrings,  attended  on  the  brahmins,  while  others  adorned  with 
jewels  served  other  castes. 

33 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 

In  the  interval  between  the  two  parts  of  the  sacrifice,  eloquent 
and  learned  pundits  debated  metaphysical  problems  and  vied 
with  each  other  in  the  display  of  wisdom  and  acumen. 

Day  by  day,  the  sacrificial  ceremonies  were  carried  out  by 
learned  and  holy  priests.  There  were  none  assisting  at  the 
holy  ritual  who  were  illiterate  or  unacquainted  with  the  Vedas. 

Each  attendant  of  the  king  was  inspired  by  exalted  principles 
and  all  were  highly  eloquent  and  deeply  versed  in  the  scriptures. 

Eighteen  pillars  of  wood  were  set  up  in  the  place  of  sacrifice, 
each  made  of  a  different  kind  of  timber.  Priests,  skilled  in 
the  art  of  sacrificial  rites,  overlaid  them  with  gold.  Each  of  the 
eighteen  columns  was  twenty-one  feet  in  height,  polished  and 
of  octangular  shape  and  all  were  firmly  fixed  in  the  earth 
and  covered  with  embroidered  cloths.  In  addition,  they  were 
adorned  with  sandalwood  and  flowers  and  looked  as  beautiful 
as  the  constellation  of  the  seven  sages,1  in  the  sky.  Sacrificial 
pits  were  constructed  by  master  masons  and  the  fire  kindled 
by  brahmins. 

The  sacrificial  pit  prepared  for  King  Dasaratha  was  formed 
like  a  great  eagle  in  gold,  its  wings  set  with  gems. 

The  beasts  to  be  sacrificed  to  each  particular  deity  were  bound 
according  to  scriptural  injunction.  There  were  birds,  snakes 
and  horses,  and  according  to  tradition,  the  chief  priest  bound 
the  aquatic  animals,  such  as  turtles,  in  the  sacrificial  pavilion. 
Three  hundred  beasts  and  the  horse  which  had  roamed  over 
the  earth  were  assembled. 

Queen  Kaushalya  joyfully  paid  reverence  to  the  horse  before 
making  the  sacrifice  with  three  strokes  of  the  sword.  Prompted 
by  righteous  desire,  Queen  Kaushalya  passed  the  night  watching 
over  the  dead  body  of  the  horse,  then  the  priests  caused  the 
king's  serving  women  and  the  courtesans  to  approach  it. 

The  twice-born  of  subdued  senses  cooked  the  fat  of  the  horse 
on  the  fire  in  the  manner  prescribed  by  the  shastra.  King 
Dasaratha  inhaling  the  odour  emitted  by  the  fat,  acknowledged 
and  expiated  his  sins.  Sixteen  assistant  priests  made  offerings 
of  parts  of  the  horse  into  the  fire,  in  spoons  fashioned  of  cane, 
plaksha  wood  being  used  in  other  sacrifices.    At  the  horse 

1  The  Plough,  each  star  of  which  it  laid  to  be  presided  over  by  one  of  the 
immortal  saga. 


BALA    KANDA 

sacrifice,  three  days  of  special  rituals  are  observed :  during  the 
first  day  the  Agmstona  is  performed ;  during  the  second  day, 
the  Uktha  rite,  during  the  third  day  the  Atiratra  rite.  The 
great  sacrificial  acts  named  Jyotishtoma,  Agnisktona,  Atiratas3 
Abhijit,  Vishnajit  and  Aptoryama  are  also  observed. 

King  Dasaratha,  the  promoter  of  his  dynasty,  on  the  conclu- 
sion of  the  sacrifice,  gave  away  four  parts  of  his  kingdom,  as 
dakshina1  to  the  four  priests.  The  king  distributed  alms 
following  the  great  example  of  Swayambhumanu  of  old.  The 
sacrifice  being  concluded,  that  great  monarch  gave  large  portions 
of  the  earth  in  charity,  to  the  officiating  priests,  and  finally  that 
magnanimous  sovereign  bestowed  the  whole  kingdom  on  the 
assisting  priests. 

Then  the  holy  brahmins  addressed  that  sinless  monarch, 
saying  :  "  O  Lord  of  Men,  we  are  not  able  to  protect,  defend 
and  administer  this  vast  empire,  for  we  have  dedicated  ourselves 
to  holy  study.  Therefore,  O  Great  King,  we  render  back  these 
lands  to  thee,  grant  us  in  return  some  lesser  gift,  be  it  gems, 
gold  or  coins  to  help  us  in  our  hermitages." 

Thus  addressed  by  the  learned  brahmins,  the  king  bestowed 
on  them  a  hundred  million  pieces  of  gold,  and  four  hundred 
million  silver  coins.  Then  the  assisting  priests  placed  all  the 
king's  gifts  before  the  holy  sages,  Vasishtha  and  Rishyasringa 
and  begged  them  to  distribute  them. 

Each  one  received  his  just  share  and  the  priests  were  highly 
pleased  and  well  satisfied.  The  king  gave  away  gold  coins 
to  those  who  had  come  to  witness  the  sacrifice  and  ten  million 
gold  coins  were  bestowed  on  other  brahmins  present  at  that  time. 
A  needy  mendicant  begged  for  the  diamond  studded  bracelet 
worn  by  the  king  himself  and  it  was  freely  bestowed  on  him. 

Beholding  the  brahmins  fully  satisfied,  King  Dasaratha  with 
great  gladness  made  obeisance  to  them  again  and  again. 

The  twice-born  then  bestowed  their  blessings  on  the  king 
who  was  exceedingly  liberal  and  valorous  and  who  saluted  them 
by  prostrating  himself  on  the  earth. 

Thus  ended  the  great  sacrifice,  the  means  of  destroying  sin 
and  attaining  heaven  and  scarcely  to  be  accomplished  by  other 
monarchs. 

1  Dakshina.     Gifts  of  charity  given  at  the  conclusion  of  a  ceremony, 
35 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 

Then  the  king  addressed  Rishyasringa  and  said :  "  O  Thou 
of  great  and  virtuous  resolve,  tell  me  what  further  must  be  done 
by  me  to  be  blessed  with  an  heir  ?  " 

The  Sage  Rishyasringa  replied :  "  O  King,  thou  shalt  be 
blessed  with  four  sons,  who  will  perpetuate  the  royal  line." 


CHAPTER    15 

To  destroy  Ravana,  Shri  Vishnu  resolves  to  incarnate 

The  wise  Rishyasringa,  versed  in  the  Scriptures,  meditated  for 
a  while  and  then  spoke  to  King  Dasaratha  saying : — 

"  O  King,  I  will  perform  the  sacrifice  Puttatresti,1  spoken  of 
in  the  Atharva  Veda,  which  will  assist  thee  in  thy  endeavour 
to  obtain  a  son." 

Then  the  sage  inaugurated  the  sacrifice  and  poured  oblations 
into  the  sacred  fire  accompanied  by  the  chant  of  Vedic  mantras. 

The  celestial  beings,  gandharvas,  siddhas*  and  sages  assembled 
to  obtain  their  portion  of  the  sacrifice.  After  the  sacrifice, 
they  all  approached  Shri  Brahma,  the  Lord  of  mankind  and 
with  joined  palms  addressed  him : — 

They  said :  "  O  Blessed  Lord,  having  been  favoured  by  thee, 
the  Asura  Havana,  perpetually  troubles  us  who  are  helpless, 
since  thou  hast  granted  great  boons  to  him  and  we  are  forced 
to  bear  his  fearful  oppression, 

"  This  Lord  of  Rakshasas  has  persecuted  the  three  worlds 
and  having  overthrown  the  guardians  of  the  earth,  he  has  even 
humbled  Indra  himself.  Provoking  the  sages,  contemplativcs, 
brahmins  and  the  gods,  he  even  controls  the  sun's  rays  and 
the  wind's  power,  even  the  ocean  in  his  presence  is  still.  At 
his  approach,  O  Blessed  Lord,  we  are  terrified.  O  Giver  of 
Boons,  be  pleased  to  bring  about  his  destruction." 

Hearing  these  words,  Brahma  reflected  for  a  while  and 

1  Puttatresti.    The  sacrifice  to  extend  the  race  by  having  sons. 
1  Siddha*.    Semi-divine  beings  that  dwell  in  the  region  between  the  earth 
and  the  sun. 

3« 


BALA    KANDA 

answered :  "  I  have  devised  a  plan  for  slaying  this  wicked  tyrant. 
It  was  granted  to  Ravana  that  no  gandharva,  yaksha  or  deva 
should  be  able  to  slay  him,  but  thinking  man  to  be  of  no  account, 
he  did  not  ask  to  be  made  invulnerable  in  regard  to  him; 
therefore,  none  but  man  can  destroy  him." 

These  words,  uttered  by  Shri  Brahma  rilled  the  celestial  and 
other  beings  with  joy. 

At  this  time  the  immortal  Vishnu,  with  conch,  disc  and  mace, 
the  Overlord  of  the  whole  world,  clad  in  a  yellow  robe,  appeared 
at  that  place.  Adored  by  the  gods,  he  drew  near  and  took 
bis  seat  by  Shri  Brahma,  then  all  the  gods  addressed  him 


"  O  Madhusudana1,  for  the  good  of  all  beings,  we  entreat 
Thee,  to  be  born  as  heir  to  the  supremely  righteous,  charitable 
and  illustrious  Sage  Dasaratha.  Appear,  O  Lord,  in  the  form 
of  four  sons  to  the  three  consorts  of  that  great  king.  Descending 
into  a  human  body,  do  thou  slay  Ravana,  the  scourge  of  the 
universe,  whom  we  are  unable  to  destroy.  That  ignorant 
Ravana,  by  his  power,  afflicts  the  devas,  siddhas  and  sages. 

0  Lord,  that  wicked  asura,  sporting  in  the  garden  of  Indra, 
has  slain  countless  nymphs  and  gandharvas.  In  company  with 
the  sages,  we  approach  Thee  so  that  we  may  be  released  from 
this  oppression.  We  take  refuge  in  Thee,  Thou  art  our  only 
asylum  ]  O  Lord,  we  beseech  Thee  to  take  birth  as  man  in 
order  to  destroy  the  enemy  of  men  and  gods." 

Thus  did  the  gods  appeal  to  Shri  Vishnu  and  He,  adored 
by  the  world,  answered  them  who  had  taken  refuge  in  Him : — 

"  O  Devas,  fear  no  more,  peace  be  with  you.    For  your  sake, 

1  will  destroy  Ravana,  together  with  his  sons,  grandsons, 
counsellors,  friends  and  relatives.  Having  slain  that  cruel  and 
wicked  asura,  the  cause  of  fear  to  iht  divine  sages,  I  will  rule 
in  the  world  of  mortals  for  eleven  thousand  years." 

Thus  did  Shri  Vishnu  grant  a  boon  to  the  gods,  and  then 
reflected  as  to  where  on  the  earth  he  should  take  birth  as  man. 

Then  the  lotus-eyed  Lord  resolved  to  become  incarnate  as 
the  four  sons  of  King  Dasaratha. 

The  celestial  sages*  the  heavenly  musicians  and  the  nymphs 

1  Madbuaudana.    Slayer  of  Madhu.     (A  demon.) 
37 


THE  RAMAYANA  OF  VALMIKI 
praised  the  Lord  saying  :  "  O  Universal  Sovereign,  destroy  the 
wicked  asura,  who  is  arrogant,  powerful  and  vain,  the  enemy 
of  Indra  and  the  scourge  of  the  ascetics  and  pious  men,  one 
who  strikes  terror  into  every  heart,  causing  universal  lamentation. 
"  Destroy,  O  Lord,  this  mighty  being,  together  with  his  army, 
generals,  relatives,  friends  and  followers,  remove  the  cause  of 
the  world's  woe  and  then  return  to  thy  perfect  abode." 


chapter    i 6 

He  decides  to  incarnate  as  the  four  sons  of  King  Dasaratka 

The  Omniscient  Lord,  Shri  Narayana,1  listened  to  the  praise 
offered  by  the  gods  and  honouring  them,  uttered  words  of 
pleasing  import  to  them. 

He  said :  "  O  Devas,  by  what  means  may  the  King  of  the 
Asuras  be  slain,  that  thorn  in  the  side  of  holy  men  ?  " 

The  gods  with  one  accord  answered  the  imperishable  Lord, 
crying :  "  Do  Thou  become  incarnate  in  the  form  of  man  and 
slay  him  in  open  fight.  O  Conqueror  of  Thy  foes,  Ravana 
has  long  practised  austerities,  by  means  of  which  he  has  won 
the  favour  of  the  world-revered  Brahma.  That  deity  has 
granted  him  a  boon,  by  which  he  is  rendered  invulnerable  to  all 
but  man.  Considering  man  of  no  account,  he  does  not  fear 
him.  The  boon  bestowed  on  him  by  Shri  Brahma  has  made 
him  arrogant  and  he  is  bringing  destruction  to  the  three  worlds 
and  carrying  off  women  by  violence.  Therefore,  O  Lord,  man 
alone  can  bring  about  his  death." 

Hearing  the  words  of  the  gods,  Shri  Vishnu  resolved  to  choose 
King  Dasaratha  as  his  sire. 

At  that  time,  the  illustrious  King  Dasaratha,  the  slayer  of  his 
foes,  began  to  observe  the  sacrifice  in  order  to  obtain  an  heir. 
Shri  Vishnu,  having  formed  his  resolution  to  appear  in  human 
form  and  concluded  his  deliberations  with  Shri  Brahma, 
vanished. 

1  Narayana.    A  name  of  Shri  Vishnu,  "  He  whose  abode  is  the  water  ". 

38 


BALA    KANDA 

Forthwith  there  issued  from  King  Dasaratha's  sacrificial  fire 
to  the  sound  resembling  the  beating  of  a  drum,  a  great  Being 
of  limitless  splendour,  of  glowing  countenance,  clad  in  red  and 
hairy  as  a  lion.  Bearing  auspicious  marks  and  adorned  with 
beautiful  ornaments,  his  height  was  equal  to  the  peak  of  a 
mountain.  Striding  boldly  like  a  lion,  his  form  shone  as  fire. 
In  both  hands  he  carried,  as  would  a  beloved  spouse,  a  vessel 
of  gold,  with  a  silver  cover,  filled  with  payasa.1 

This  great  Being  addressed  the  king  saying :  "  O  King,  I 
come  from  Prajapati.*  The  king  bowing  down  with  joined 
palms,  answered :  "  Thou  art  welcome,  O  Lord,  what  orders 
hast  thou  for  me  ?  " 

Then  the  Being  replied :  "Receive  the  fruit  of  thy  sacrifice  ! 
O  Chief  of  Men,  accept  this  dish  of  payasa  prepared  by  the  gods, 
it  will  bring  thee  sons  and  increase  thy  power.  Let  it  be  eaten 
by  thy  consorts,  they  will  then  present  thee  with  the  heirs  for 
whose  sake  thou  hast  performed  the  sacrifice." 

The  king  received  the  food  contained  in  the  golden  vessel 
prepared  by  the  gods  and  reverently  raised  it  to  his  forehead. 
Having  received  the  divine  repast,  he  rejoiced  as  a  penniless  man 
on  obtaining  wealth. 

Forthwith  that  wonderful  and  resplendent  being  vanished, 
having  offered  the  consecrated  food  to  the  king. 

The  tidings  of  this  great  event  caused  the  consorts  of  King 
Dasaratha  extreme  delight  and  they  appeared  as  radiant  as  the 
beams  of  the  moon  irradiating  the  autumnal  sky. 

Entering  the  private  apartments,  the  king  addressed  Queen 
Kaushalya,  saying :  "  Receive  this  food  and  partake  of  it  that 
thou  mayest  have  a  son/' 

Thereafter,  the  monarch  gave  half  of  the  dish  to  Queen 
Kaushalya  and  one-third  to  Queen  Sumitra.  Then  he  gave 
the  eighth  of  the  payasa  to  Queen  Kaikeyi  and,  after  reflection, 
the  remainder  to  Queen  Sumitra.  In  this  way,  the  King  divided 
the  dish  of  payasa  among  his  three  queens. 

On  partaking  of  the  food,  the  beautiful  queens  were  overjoyed 
and  considered  themselves  most  fortunate. 

Having  consumed  the  payasa  presented  to  them  by  the  king, 

1  Payasa.    A  special  preparation  of  rice  in  milk, 
1  Prajapati.    A  name  of  Brahma,  the  Creator. 

39 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 

the  queens  soon  became  pregnant,  their  wombs  glowing  like 
the  fire  in  the  sun. 

The  illustrious  sqvereign  perceiving  that  the  wombs  of  his 
consorts  were  quickened  and  that  his  great  desire  was  about 
to  be  fulfilled,  was  filled  with  supreme  joy,  as  is  Shri  Vishnu 
when  worshipped  by  the  gods  and  perfect  beings  in  the  celestial 
region. 


CHAPTER    17 

To  assist  Shri  Vishnu,  celestial  beings  incarnate  as  warriors 
of  the  monkey  tribe 

Shri  Vishnu  having  become  the  sons1  of  King  Dasaratha,  the 
divine  Brahma  thus  addressed  the  gods :  "  The  blessed  Lord 
Vishnu,  the  Ocean  of  Truth  is  engaged  in  a  just  undertaking 
for  the  good  of  all,  you  should  therefore  support  Him  by 
becoming  incarnate  as  great  beings  in  the  monkey  tribe,  skilled 
in  the  arts  of  magic,  swift  as  the  wind,  conversant  with  the 
dictates  of  virtue,  wise  and  equal  in  might  to  the  Lord,  invincible, 
endowed  with  celestial  bodies  and  skilful  in  the  science  of  war- 
fare. Some  among  you  should  assume  the  forms  of  nymphs, 
gandharvas  and  female  ascetics  who  will  give  birth  to  heroes 
in  the  monkey  tribe. 

"  In  the  past,  when  I  yawned,  the  great  bear,  by  the  name 
of  Jambavan,  issued  from  my  mouth." 

The  gods  thus  instructed  by  the  blessed  Lord,  caused  warriors 
to  be  born  in  the  monkey  tribe  from  the  wombs  of  countless 
celestial  beings. 

Indra  created  Bali,  the  Sun  created  Sugriva;  Brihaspati 
created  the  wise  Tara,  Kuvera  begat  Gandha-madana,1  Vishwa- 
karma8  begat  the  mighty  ape  Nala,  Agni  begat  Nila,  who  was 
as  resplendent  as  fire  and  in  valour  surpassed  his  rather. 

1  Sons.    The  Lord  was  partially  manifested  is  all  the  aons  of  King  Daivatha. 

*  Gandha-madana.    A  general  of  the  monkey  allies  of  Rama. 

*  Viihwakarma.    The  architect  of  the  god*. 


BALA    KANDA 

The  Aswini-Kumaras1  produced  Minda  and  Dvivida ; 
Varuna2  begat  Sucbena ;  Megha,8  was  the  father  of  Sharabha, 
the  mighty ;  Favana4  begat  the  warrior  called  Hanuman,  whose 
body  was  as  hard  as  a  diamond  and  whose  speed  equalled  an 
eagle's ;  he  excelled  all  the  other  warriors  in  wisdom  and 
power. 

There  were  thousands  of  warriors  born  in  the  monkey  tribe 
ready  to  destroy  Ravana.  All  the  bears,  monkeys  and  chimpan- 
zees resembled  the  god  that  had  produced  them  in  characteristics, 
habits  and  prowess,  and  many  were  of  outstanding  valour.  The 
female  chimpanzees  and  bears  gave  birth  to  great  beings  of 
divine  nature.  They  produced  hundreds  and  thousands  of 
healthy  progeny.  These  dwellers  of  the  forest  were  imposing 
in  form  and  in  strength  and  fearlessness  resembled  lions  and 
tigers.  All  were  able  to  cleave  rocks  and  mountains  and  fight 
with  their  nails  and  teeth.  Skilled  in  every  kind  of  weapon, 
they  could  shake  great  peaks,  uproot  the  stoutest  trees  and  by 
their  velocity  even  put  the  sea  god  to  shame.  Able  to  tear  up 
the  earth  with  their  feet  and  cause  the  ocean  to  overflow,  they 
could  fly  in  the  air  and  even  seize  the  clouds. 

These  beings  of  the  monkey  tribe  wandered  in  the  woods, 
making  captive  the  elephants,  and  by  their  shouts  causing  the 
birds  in  flight  to  fall  to  the  ground.  Thus  were  born  millions 
of  monkeys,  able  to  assume  any  form,  together  with  hundreds 
and  thousands  of  monkey  chiefs. 

These  chiefs  begot  other  brave  and  powerful  beings,  some 
of  whom  dwelt  on  the  mountains  while  others  inhabited  the 
valleys  and  forests. 

The  two  brothers,  Sugriva,  the  offspring  of  Surya,1  and  Bali, 
the  son  of  India,  became  the  leaders  of  all  the  monkeys.  Others 
lived  under  the  command  of  group  leaders,  such  as  Nala,  Nila 
and  Hanuman.  They  were  as  strong  as  eagles  and  skilled  in 
every  sort  of  warfare. 

Wandering  about  the  forest,  they  slew  lions,  tigers  and 

1  Asvini-kumaras.  Gods,  ions  of  the  tun,  precursors  of  the  dawn,  also  the 
patrons  of  medicine. 

■  Varuna.    The  Hindu  Neptune. 

•  Megha.    The  Regent  of  the  clouds, 
'  Pavana.    Lord  of  the  winds. 

*  Surya — the  sua. 

41 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 

poisonous  snakes.  The  powerful  long-armed  Bali  protected 
the  monkeys,  bears  and  chimpanzees  by  his  prowess.  These 
heroes,  invincible  as  mountains  and  of  immense  size,  born 
to  assist  Shri  Rama,  filled  the  earth. 


chapter    IS 

King  Dasaratha's  sorts  are  born  and  grow  to  manhood 

When  the  sacrifice  of  King  Dasaratha  had  been  brought  to 
a  successful  conclusion,  the  gods,  receiving  their  due  portions, 
returned  to  their  abode. 

The  king  also,  having  fulfilled  the  obligations  incurred  by 
his  initiation,  returned  to  the  capital  with  his  queens,  servants, 
army  and  vehicles. 

The  royal  guests  to  whom  due  hospitality  had  been  shown, 
made  obeisance  to  the  Sage  Vasishtha  and  returned  to  their 
homes.  When  they  departed,  ornaments,  apparel  and  gifts  were 
distributed  to  their  armies  who  set  out  for  their  own  cities 
with  joy. 

King  Dasaratha  attended  the  departure  of  his  guests  and  then 
re-entered  the  capital  in  a  procession  preceded  by  the  holy 
brahmins. 

Rishyasringa  with  bis  wife  Shanta  then  took  leave  of  the 
monarch  and  departed  to  his  own  city,  King  Dasaratha  accom- 
panying him  for  some  distance.  Then  the  king,  expecting  to 
be  blessed  with  an  heir,  dwelt  happily  in  Ayodhya. 

Six  seasons  after  the  completion  of  the  sacrifice,  in  the  twelfth 
month,  on  the  ninth  day  of  the  moon  of  Chaitramas,  the  star 
Punarvasu  was  in  the  ascendant,  and  the  planets,  the  Sun,  Mars, 
Saturn,  Jupiter  and  Venus  were  exalted,  and  those  signs  of 
the  zodiac,  such  as  the  Ram,  the  Fishes,  and  the  Scales  in 
auspicious  aspects,  the  moon  and  Jupiter  being  in  conjunction 
at  the  period  called  Karka.  Then  the  world-honoured  Lord 
of  the  World,  endowed  with  divine  attributes,  Shri  Ramachandra 
was  born  of  the  womb  of  Kaushalya. 
43 


BALA    KANDA 

The  Promoter  of  the  glory  of  the  House  of  Ikshwaku,  the 
blessed  Lord  Vishnu  was  born  as  a  son  of  Queen  Raushalya. 
When  this  child  of  limitless  splendour  was  bom,  the  queen 
looked  most  beautiful,  like  Aditi  of  old,  favoured  by  Indra. 

The  hero  of  the  realm  of  truth,  Bharata,  was  born  of  Queen 
Kaikeyi.  Possessed  of  every  grace,  he  was  endowed  with  a 
quarter  of  the  glory  of  Shri  Vishnu. 

Sumitra  gave  birth  to  Lakshmana  and  Shatrughna,  heroes 
skilful  in  the  wielding  of  weapons  and  also  partaking  of  Shri 
Vishnu's  glory. 

Bharata  was  born  when  the  star  Pushya  was  in  the  ascendant 
in  the  Lagna  Meena.1  During  the  ascendance  of  the  star 
Shlasa  in  the  Lagna  Karka,*  at  the  time  of  sunrise  Shatrughna 
was  born. 

Each  of  the  sons  of  the  king  had  special  attributes  and  were 
endowed  with  great  qualities,  they  were  as  resplendent  as  the 
Purva,3  Uttara*  and  Bhadripata*  stars. 

At  that  time  gandharvas  played  divine  melodies,  nymphs 
danced,  celestial  drums  were  heard  and  the  gods  showered 
flowers  from  the  sky. 

Everywhere  in  the  capital,  signs  of  rejoicing  were  apparent ; 
the  streets  were  rilled  with  actors  and  dancers  and  those  who 
sang  or  played  on  various  instruments. 

The  king  gave  gifts  to  the  bards  and  ballad  singers  and 
conferred  wealth  and  cows  on  the  brahmins. 

The  four  children  were  named  on  the  twelfth  day ;  the  eldest 
son  received  the  name  Ramachandra,  and  the  name  given  to 
the  son  of  Queen  Kaikeyi  was  Bharata. 

The  sons  of  Queen  Sumitra  were  called  Lakshmana  and 
Shatrughna.  The  ceremony  was  performed  by  the  holy  Sage 
Vasishtha  with  great  joy.  After  this,  the  brahmins  of  the  capital 
and  the  country  were  feasted  and  presented  with  gifts  and 
precious  gems. 

Resembling  the  deity  Shri  Brahma,  the  king  showed  universal 

1  Lagna  Meena — Pisces. 

1  Lagna  Karka — Cancer.  Lagna  is  the  point  where  the  horizon  and  the  path 
of  the  planett  meet. 

•  Purva— Star  of  the  East. 

*  Uttara— Northern  Star. 

1  Bhadripata — One  of  the  Lunar  Asterisms. 

43 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 

benevolence.  The  princes  grew  in  the  knowledge  of  the  Veda, 
in  courage  and  active  goodwill  to  all.  Though  each  was  wise, 
learned  and  possessed  of  every  virtue,  yet  Shri  Ramachandra 
excelled  them  in  truthfulness  and  energy,  and  was  beloved  of  all, 
like  the  flawless  orb  of  the  moon.  Expert  in  mounting  the 
elephant,  the  horse  and  the  chariot,  he  was  skilful  in  archery 
and  devoted  to  the  service  of  his  parents. 

Shri  Lakshmana  cherished  an  exceeding  love  for  his  elder 
brother  Shri  Ramachandra,  the  delight  of  the  world,  and  Shri 
Rama  loved  him  also  as  his  very  self.  Shri  Ramachandra  loved 
Lakshmana  who  was  endowed  with  every  excellent  quality,  as 
his  own  life,  and  neither  slept  nor  partook  of  any  nourishment 
without  the  other. 

When  Raghava  mounted  on  horseback,  engaged  in  the  chase, 
Shri  Lakshmana  followed  with  bow  and  arrows  to  protect 
him. 

Emulating  the  example  of  Shri  Ramachandra,  Bharata  loved 
Shatrughna  and  was  loved  by  him  with  equal  affection. 

The  monarch  was  as  pleased  and  satisfied  with  his  four  sons 
as  is  Shri  Brahma  with  the  four  Vedas.  Observing  the  wisdom, 
prudence  and  modesty  of  his  children,  who  were  endowed  with 
every  great  attribute,  King  Dasaratha  derived  as  great  a  delight 
from  them  as  Brahma  from  the  four  guardians  of  the  earth. 

The  princes  studied  the  Veda  with  perseverance,  affectionately 
attended  on  the  king  and  acquired  proficiency  in  the  use  of  arms. 

One  day  when  the  illustrious  sovereign  was  in  council  with 
his  relatives,  ministers,  and  learned  preceptors,  deliberating  on 
the  marriage  of  his  four  sons,  the  great  Sage  Vishwamitra 
appeared  in  the  capital.  Seeking  an  audience  with  the  king, 
he  addressed  the  doorkeeper,  saying :  "  Inform  the  king  speedily 
that  the  son  of  Gadhi  of  the  race  of  Kaushika  is  at  the  gate." 
The  awe-stricken  guard  hastened  to  the  royal  apartment  and 
conveyed  the  tidings  with  due  respect  to  his  majesty,  who  with 
his  Guru  Vasishtha  went  forth  to  welcome  the  sage  at  the  gate 
and  bring  him  into  the  royal  palace. 

As  Brahma  welcomes  Indra,  so  did  they  greet  the  muni,  and 
beholding  that  resplendent  and  mighty  ascetic,  the  observer  of 
great  vows,  of  cheerful  countenance,  the  king  offered  him  arghya 
according  to  the  prescribed  tradition. 


BALA    KANDA 

The  virtuous  Vishwamitra  then  enquired  of  the  king  concern- 
ing the  welfare  of  the  empire,  the  prosperity  of  his  people, 
relatives  and  friends  and  also  as  to  the  state  of  the  royal  treasury. 
Thereafter,  the  sage  questioned  the  monarch  further,  saying : 
"Are  thy  vassals  obedient  to  thee  ?  Are  thine  enemies  subdued  ? 
Are  the  Vedic  sacrifices  duly  observed  in  thy  dominion  ?  Are 
strangers  entertained  with  fitting  hospitality?"  Then  after 
enquiring  as  to  the  well-being  of  Shri  Vasishtha  and  other  sages, 
Shri  Vishwamitra  entered  the  palace. 

Here  the  king  once  more  paid  him  reverence  and  with  delight 
addressed  him  saying :  "  O  August  Sage,  thy  coming  has  caused 
me  as  great  a  joy  as  the  acquisition  of  ambrosia  or  the  advent 
of  rain  falling  on  the  parched  earth.  O  Sage,  thy  approach 
is  as  grateful  to  me  as  the  birth  of  a  son  to  one  without  an  heir 
or  the  recovery  of  his  wealth  to  one  who  imagined  it  to  be 
irretrievably  lost.  O  Mighty  Sage,  I  welcome  thee  with  my 
whole  heart,  say  what  commands  thou  hast  for  me  ?  When 
thy  glance  doth  fall  upon  me,  O  Sage,  I  become  righteous  and 
acquire  merit;  to-day  my  life  is  rendered  fruitful  and  the 
purpose  of  my  birth  is  accomplished  since  thou  hast  visited 
me.  O  Auspicious  One,  formerly  thou  wast  a  warrior  sage, 
illustrious  by  virtue  of  thy  sacred  practices,  but  now  thou  art 
become  a  brahmin1  and  art  worthy  of  supreme  worship  by  me. 
Thine  advent  has  conferred  purity  and  blessing  on  me,  and  by  thy 
sacred  presence  both  the  kingdom  and  I  have  been  purged  of 
every  offence.  Be  pleased  to  tell  us  of  the  purpose  of  thy  coming, 
I  desire  to  manifest  my  gratitude  to  thee  by  rendering 
thee  service.  O  Kaushika,  do  not  hesitate  to  speak  thy  will, 
I  am  ready  to  do  anything  for  thee ;  thou  art  to  me  as  a  god. 
O  Brahman  Seer,  by  beholding  thee,  I  have  acquired  the  great 
merits  of  a  pilgrimage." 

Hearing  the  words  of  King  Dasaratha,  sweet  sounding  and 
in  accordance  with  the  scriptural  injunctions,  the  great  sage, 
the  repository  of  all  excellent  qualities,  was  highly  gratified. 


1  Vishwamitra  was  originally  of  the  warrior  class  and  won  brahminhood 
by  his  asceticism.     His  story  follows  later. 

45 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 
CHAPTER    19 

Vi$hwamitra*s  request 

Hearing  the  laudatory  and  admirable  words  of  that  Lion  among 
kings,  Dasaratha,  the  great  Sage  Vishwamitra  answered :  "  O 
Great  King,  who  in  the  world  save  one  of  the  House  of 
Ikshwaku,  instructed  by  Shri  Vasishtha,  could  give  tongue  to 
such  utterances  ?  O  Illustrious  Monarch,  I  will  now  unfold  my 
purpose,  do  thou  fulfil  it  and  prove  the  truth  of  thy  words. 

**  O  Chief  of  Men,  when  I  undertake  the  observance  of  sacred 
sacrifices  to  enhance  my  perfection,  two  rakshasas,  adepts  in 
magic,  create  great  impediments.  When,  after  long  effort,  the 
sacrifice  approaches  consummation,  then  these  two  rakshasas, 
Maricha  and  Suvahu  destroy  the  rite  and  defile  the  altar  with 
blood  and  flesh.  My  holy  endeavours  being  thus  frustrated, 
I  become  despondent  and  leave  the  place  of  sacrifice.  O  King, 
it  is  not  permitted  to  me  to  show  wrath  when  engaged  in  sacrifice, 
and  I  therefore  refrain  from  cursing  them.  Do  thou  lend  me 
the  services  of  thy  son,  Shri  Ramachandra,  the  truthful,  the 
brave,  that  hero,  whose  locks  fall  on  his  cheeks. 

"  Under  my  protection,  he  will  destroy  those  mischievous 
rakshasas  and  I  will  confer  great  blessings  on  him.  I  will 
instruct  him  for  his  good  in  many  sciences  and  he  will  become 
famous  in  the  three  worlds.  The  rakshasas  will  not  be  able 
to  stand  against  Rama  and  no  one  else  can  destroy  them.  They 
are  proud  and  powerful,  but  now,  owing  to  their  sins,  their 
destruction  is  imminent,  they  will  not  be  able  to  withstand  Shri 
Ramachandra, 

"  Do  not  allow  a  father's  affection  to  overcome  thee  ;  I  assure 
thee  that  in  the  presence  of  Shri  Ramachandra,  the  rakshasas 
are  as  good  as  slain.  Rama's  virtues  are  known  to  Shri  Vasishtha 
and  other  ascetics.  O  King,  if  thou  seekest  everlasting  renown 
and  merit  in  this  world,  then  let  Shri  Rama  go  with  me.  Seek 
the  advice  of  Shri  Vasishtha  and  thy  counsellors  and  if  they 
approve  the  project,  give  me  Ramachandra.  Be  pleased,  O 
King,  to  give  up  thy  beloved  son  for  the  space  of  ten  days, 
so  that  I  may  complete  the  sacrifice.  O  King,  help  me  in 
46 


BALA    KANDA 

furthering  my  sacrifice,  and  do  not  let  the  allotted  time  pass 
in  vain.    Do  what  is  auspicious,  do  not  grieve." 

The  upright  and  resplendent  Sage  Vishwamitra  having  uttered 
these  righteous  words,  became  silent. 

The  words  of  Shri  Vishwamitra  filled  the  king  with  anxiety 
and  he  became  distraught.  Because  of  these  inexorable  words, 
the  monarch  trembled  and  fell  unconscious  from  his  seat 
overcome  with  grief. 


CHAPTER    20 

The  king's  reluctance  to  allow  Shri  Rama  to  contend  with 
Markka  and  Suvahu 

For  some  rime  the  king  lay  insensible,  then  regaining  conscious- 
ness he  said :  "  My  lotus-eyed  Rama  is  but  fifteen  years  old, 
I  cannot  believe  he  is  capable  of  contending  with  the  rakshasas. 
I  possess  a  large  and  well-equipped  army  and  will  myself  lead  it 
against  the  demons.  My  seasoned  warriors,  who  are  courageous 
and  skilled  in  bearing  weapons  and  who  are  suitably  remunerated 
by  me,  are  fit  to  fight  the  rakshasas  in  battle ;  therefore,  do  not 
ask  for  Rama.  I  myself,  bearing  my  bow  and  arrows,  will  lead 
the  army  in  the  field  and  fight  to  my  last  breath.  With  this 
protection,  thy  sacrifice  will  come  to  a  successful  conclusion. 
I  will  go  thither  in  person,  do  not  take  away  Shri  Ramachandra. 
Shri  Rama  is  still  a  child  without  military  experience,  he  cannot 
estimate  the  strength  or  weakness  of  the  enemy,  he  has  not  yet 
acquired  proficiency  in  warfare. 

"  Thou  knowest  well,  O  Sage,  how  crafty  are  the  rakshasas 
in  combat.  Shri  Ramachandra  is  not  capable  of  opposing  them 
successfully.  I  cannot  bear  the  thought  of  Ramachandra 
contending  with  them.  O  Sage,  I  shall  not  live,  even  for  a 
moment,  if  Shri  Rama  be  separated  from  me,  therefore,  I  entreat 
thee,  do  not  ask  for  him.  Should'st  thou  insist  on  Rama 
accompanying  thee,  then  take  my  forces  also  with  thee.  O 
August  Vishwamitra,  recollect  I  pray  thee  that  I  am  now  nine 
47  E 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 

thousand  years  old  and  have  begotten  these  sons  with  great 
difficulty.  These  princes  are  dearer  to  me  than  life  itself  and 
Shri  Ramachandra  is  the  dearest  of  them  all.  Excelling  in  virtue, 
he  is  my  eldest  son,  therefore,  do  not  take  him  from  me.  O 
Great  Sage,  how  powerful  are  these  rakshasas  ?  Who  are  their 
supporters  and  how  dost  thou  imagine  Shri  Rama  can  destroy 
them  ?  O  Blessed  Lord,  say  if  thou  deemestthat  I  and  my  army 
may  successfully  oppose  those  rakshasas  who  are  skilled  in  magic  ?" 

Shri  Vishwamitra  answered :  "  O  King,  Ravana,  born  of  the 
great  family  of  Poulastya,  having  been  favoured  by  Brahma 
with  a  boon,  is  oppressing  the  three  worlds.  He  is  exceedingly 
powerful  and  supported  by  many  asuric  followers.  It  is  said 
that  this  great  warrior  Ravana  is  the  King  of  Asuras.  He  is 
the  brother  of  Kuvera  and  the  son  of  the  Sage  Vishravas.  He 
does  not  obstruct  the  lesser  sacrifices  in  person,  but  two  mighty 
rakshasas  named  Maricha  and  Suvahu,  prompted  by  him,  dis- 
rupt the  sacrificial  rites." 

The  king  listened  to  the  muni's  words  and  then  spoke  :  "  I 
am  not  able  to  oppose  that  evil-souled  asura.  O  Knower  of 
the  Law  of  Righteousness,  I  am  but  a  wretched  man  and  thou 
art  worthy  of  my  worship ;  thou  art  verily  a  god  and  also 
my  spiritual  preceptor.  Since  the  gods,  the  danavas,  gand- 
harvas,  yakshas,  birds  and  snakes  cannot  destroy  Ravana,  how 
can  man  do  so  ?  In  battle,  Ravana  is  able  to  defeat  the  mightiest 
warriors,  it  is  certain  therefore,  that  neither  I  nor  my  army 
can#ontend  with  him.  How  can  I  then  send  my  son,  beautiful 
as  a  god,  but  inexperienced  in  war,  to  oppose  Ravana  ?  O  Sage, 
I  will  not  let  my  young  child  go.  Lavana,  the  son  of  Madhu 
is  among  those  who  destroy  the  sacrifice.  I  will  not  give  up 
my  son.  The  sons  of  Sunda  and  Upasunda,  Maricha  and 
Suvahu,  who  resemble  death  itself  in  battle,  are  among  those 
who  impede  the  sacrifice.  They  are  skilful  and  seasoned 
warriors,  I  dare  not  send  my  young  son  against  them.  Whoever 
thou  chooseth,  friends,  relatives  or  even  I  myself  will  accompany 
thee  to  engage  in  the  fight." 

On  hearing  the  king's  injudicious  words,  the  holy  sage  was 
enraged.    As  an  oblation  poured  into  the  fire  adds  to  the 
fierceness  of  the  flame,  so  did  the  words  of  King  Dasaratha 
add  to  the  fire  of  anger  kindled  in  the  sage's  heart. 
48 


BALA     KANDA 

CHAPTER    21 

On  Vasishtha's  advice  the  king  acquiesces 

Hearing  the  words  of  King  Dasaratha  inspired  by  solicitude 
for  his  son,  the  great  sage  replied  in  displeasure : — 

"  O  King,  recollect  that  thou  art  born  in  the  house  of  Raghu, 
how  can'st  thou  presume  to  break  thy  promise  ?  This  action 
is  unworthy  of  thy  royal  line  and  is  also  improper.  If  this  be 
thy  determined  desire,  I  will  take  my  leave,  do  thou  live  at  ease 
amidst  thy  relatives  and  friends,  O  Violater  of  thy  Word !  " 

At  the  wrath  of  the  august  sage,  the  whole  earth  shook  and 
the  gods  began  to  tremble.  Seeing  the  whole  world  shaken 
with  terror,  the  wise  and  patient  muni  Shri  Vasishtha  intervened, 
and  thus  addressed  the  king : — 

"  O  King,  thou  art  born  in  the  family  of  Ikshwaku  and  art 
righteousness  personified !  Blessed  by  fortune,  filled  with 
patience  and  endurance,  thou  hast  cherished  great  vows  and 
should'st  not,  therefore,  abandon  dharma.1  The  three  worlds 
know  thee  as  virtuous,  it  is  thy  duty  to  maintain  integrity  and 
not  to  act  in  contradiction  to  it.  O  Chief  of  Men,  if  one  making 
a  promise  does  not  honour  it,  he  loses  the  merit  of  his  good 
deeds.  It  is,  therefore,  for  thee  to  be  faithful  to  thy  word 
and  let  Rama  accompany  this  sage.  Though  Shri  Ramachandra 
is  inexperienced  in  warfare,  yet  the  asuras  will  not  be  able  to 
overcome  him.  Furthermore,  he  is  under  the  protection  of 
Shri  Vishwamitra  and  no  harm  can  come  to  him.  How  can  one 
steal  the  nectar  that  is  surrounded  by  fire  ?  The  holy  Vish- 
wamitra is  virtue  itself,  his  powers  are  unsurpassed,  and  there 
is  none  living  equal  to  him  in  wisdom  and  asceticism.  In  the 
whole  world  of  men  and  other  beings,  none  excels  him  in  the 
use  of  weapons  and  none  has  fathomed  the  depth  of  his  nature. 
Neither  the  celestials,  nor  the  sages,  nor  the  asuras,  nor  any 
other  beings  know  the  full  glory  of  this  sage.  The  god 
Krishasawa  and  his  highly  virtuous  sons  gave  every  variety 
of  weapon  to  Vishwamitra  when  he  was  king.  The  two  daughters 

1  Dharma — The  traditional  right  action  is  dharma — personal  action  is  duty. 
It  has  been  thought  best  to  translate  it  as  righteousness  in  most  cases. 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 

of  Daksha,  Jaya  and  Suprabha  invented  thousands  of  resplendent 
weapons.  Shri  Vishwamitra  is  not  one,  but  many  in  one  form ; 
he  is  illustrious,  mighty  and  able  to  defeat  any  in  battle.  Jaya 
produced  five  hundred  weapons  supremely  potent  and  capable 
of  destroying  a  host  of  asuras.  Suprabha  also  created  five 
hundred  weapons  of  war  which  no  foe  in  the  world  could 
withstand.  Shri  Vishwamitra  is  an  adept  in  the  use  of  all  these 
arms,  O  King,  he  is  also  able  to  create  many  new  weapons 
and  there  is  nothing  in  the  three  divisions  of  time1  which  is 
not  known  to  him.  Do  not  hesitate  to  send  thy  son  Rama 
with  this  mighty  and  courageous  sage,  Shri  Vishwamitra,  and 
do  not  entertain  any  fears  for  his  safety.  The  Sage  Vishwamitra 
is  well  able  to  destroy  the  demons,  but  asks  for  the  services 
of  thy  son  for  his  own  good." 

The  Guru  Vasishtha  having  thus  exhorted  the  monarch,  the 
king  cheerfully  acquiesced  to  Shri  Ratnachandra  accompanying 
the  sage. 


CHAPTER    22 

Ramackandra  and  Lakshmana  set  forth  with  Vishwamitra 

Instructed  by  Shri  Vasishtha,  King  Dasaratha  with  a  cheerful 
countenance  sent  for  Prince  Rama  and  also  Prince  Lakshmana. 
At  the  time  of  their  departure,  the  Peace  Chant  was  recited 
by  the  king,  whilst  the  Guru  Vasishtha  pronounced  the  benedic- 
tion. The  illustrious  sovereign  then  smelt  the  heads8  of  his 
sons  with  joy  and  delivered  them  into  the  care  of  the  sage. 

When  the  lotus-eyed  Ramachandra  and  Prince  Lakshmana 
had  taken  their  leave,  Vayu3  sent  forth  cool  and  gentle  breezes 
redolent  with  fragrance  and  the  celestial  beings  showered  down 
flowers,  to  the  sound  of  the  beating  of  drums  and  the  blowing 
of  conches. 

1  Past,  present  and  future. 
*  The  traditional  embrace. 
■  Vayu — The  god  of  the  wind. 


BALA    KANDA 

Shri  Vishwamitra  led  the  way  followed  by  the  most  illustrious 
Ramachandra,  then  came  Shri  Lakshmana  of  flowing  locks, 
bearing  a  bow  in  his  hand. 

The  two  handsome  and  powerful  princes  with  quivers  on 
their  backs  and  bows  in  their  hands,  adding  lustre  to  the  ten 
cardinal  points,  followed  the  muni  as  if  two  three-headed  snakes1 
were  following  Shri  Vishwamitra  or  as  the  Aswinikumaras  and 
Kinneras  follow  Brahma. 

Shri  Ramachandra  and  Lakshmana,  armed  with  their  bows, 
adorned  with  precious  jewels  and  wearing  gloves  made  of 
deerskin,  resplendent  and  beautiful,  girt  with  swords,  following 
the  holy  sage,  looked  like  the  two  sons  of  Shiva. 

Coming  to  the  river  Sarayu,  nine  miles  to  the  south  of  the 
capital,  the  Sage  Vishwamitra  addressed  Shri  Rama  in  gentle 
accents,  saying :  "  O  Child,  purify  thy  body  with  water.  When 
thou  hast  done  so,  I  will  teach  thee  the  use  of  Bala  and  Atibala. 
The  application  of  these  two  herbs  will  prevent  thee  from  being 
fatigued  or  suffering  from  disease,  nor  will  age  affect  thee. 
Even  should'st  thou  retire  to  rest  without  performing  the 
purification  ceremony  no  demon  will  be  able  to  afflict  thee ; 
none  in  the  world  will  equal  thee  in  prowess.  O  Rama,  no  one 
in  the  three  worlds  will  rival  thee  in  good  fortune,  skill, 
knowledge  and  practical  wisdom.  O  Prince,  when  thou  hast 
learnt  these  sciences,  thou  wilt  be  able  to  answer  any  question 
and  thou  wilt  be  unique  in  scholarship.  These  two  sciences, 
O  Rama,  are  the  parents  of  all  other  sciences.  Thou  wilt  be 
able  to  control  hunger  and  thirst  by  their  application.  O  Prince 
of  the  House  of  Raghu,  by  the  mastery  of  this  lore,  Bala  and 
Atibala,  thou  wilt  attain  renown  throughout  the  whole  world. 
These  brilliant  sciences  are  the  daughters  of  Brahma,  I  shall 
impart  them  to  thee,  O  Prince,  because  thou  art  qualified  to 
receive  them.  O  Rama,  all  the  fruits  of  this  knowledge  are 
already  thy  attributes,  yet  when  thou  hast  mastered  it,  thou 
wilt  be  able  to  teach  it  to  others." 

Shri  Ramachandra  then  poured  the  water  over  his  body  and 
with  a  cheerful  countenance  said  to  the  Sage  Vishwamitra  : — 
"  O  Great  Rishi,  I  am  thy  servant,  teach  me  these  sciences." 

1  The  bow  on  one  shoulder,  the  quiver  on  the  other  with  the  head  between 
gave  the  appearance  of  a  three-headed  snake. 

5" 


THE    RAMAYAMA    OF    VALMIKI 

Possessed  of  the  knowledge  of  these  two  sciences,  the  mighty 
Rama  resembled  the  sun  in  autumn,  emitting  a  thousand  rays. 
Then  the  two  brothers  massaged  the  feet  of  the  holy  Guru 
and  passed  the  night  pleasantly  on  the  banks  of  the  river  Sarayu. 
Shri  Rama  being  unaccustomed  to  sleeping  on  the  ground, 
the  two  sons  of  King  Dasaratha  made  a  bed  of  grass,  then 
having  listened  to  the  gentle  words  of  Shri  Vishwamitra,  they 
passed  the  night  in  sleep. 


chapter   23 

They  reach  the  hermitage  of  Kama 

A  little  before  dawn,  the  great  Muni  Vishwaroitra,  reclining 
on  his  grassy  couch,  addressed  the  princes,  saying :  "  O  Son 
of  Queen  Kaushalya,  O  Rama,  the  dawn  is  about  to  break, 
arise  and  perform  thy  morning  devotions." 

The  two  princes,  hearing  the  words  of  the  most  generous  sage, 
rose,  performed  their  ablutions,  offered  ceremonial  water  to  the 
rising  sun,  worshipped  their  ancestors  and  began  to  repeat 
the  holy  Gayatri.1  Their  devotions  completed,  they  offered 
salutations  with  great  reverence  to  the  distinguished  ascetic  and 
stood  ready  to  proceed  further. 

In  their  company,  the  holy  sage  reached  the  confluence  of 
the  rivers  where  the  Ganges  unites  herself  with  the  Sarayu. 
There  they  beheld  the  holy  ascetics  in  their  sacred  hermitage, 
where  for  a  long  time  they  had  practised  Yoga  assiduously. 

Seeing  the  peaceful  hermitage,  Shri  Ramachandra  and 
Lakshmana  were  filled  with  delight  and  said  to  the  Sage 
Vishwamitra  :  "  O  Blessed  Lord,  whose  holy  hermitage  is  this  ? 
Who  dwells  here  ?    We  are  both  eager  to  hear  of  this." 

The  great  sage  smiled  and  answered  Rama,  saying :  "  Hear, 
my  son,  I  will  tell  thee  who  formerly  dwelt  here.    Kandarpa,1 

1  The  Gayatri — Said  to  be  the  mother  of  all  prayers,  the  moM  sacred  text 
of  the  Veda. 

1  Kandarpa — The  god  of  love. 

52 


BALA    KANOA 

whom  the  pundits  called  Kama  once  took  human  form  and 
fixed  in  meditation,  worshipped  the  Lord  Shiva  here.  When 
Shri  Shiva  was  passing  with  his  newly-wedded  bride,  accom- 
panied by  celestial  beings,  Kama  tried  to  agitate  the  mind  of 
the  Lord  Shiva  and  reaped  the  due  punishment  of  his  insolence. 
O  Son  of  the  House  of  Raghu,  Shiva  in  wrath  opened  his  third 
eye  and  the  members  of  Kama's  body  were  consumed.  Since 
Kama  was  reduced  to  ashes  by  the  God,  he  has  been  a  dis- 
embodied being.  O  Rama,  since  that  time,  he  has  been  known 
as  Ananga  (bodiless)  and  the  country  where  his  limbs  were 
strewn  as  he  sought  to  flee,  is  known  as  Anga.  This  hermit- 
age belongs  to  the  Lord  Shiva  and  the  holy  men  who  dwell 
here  are  his  traditional  devotees :  they  are  both  righteous  and 
sinless.  O  Rama,  Thou  of  pleasing  looks,  this  night  I  shall 
break  my  journey  at  this  hermitage  and  to-morrow  we  shall 
cross  the  sacred  river  and  proceed  further.  O  Rama,  let  us 
first  purify  ourselves  by  bathing  and  then  recite  the  holy  Gayatri 
silently,  offering  oblations  into  the  sacred  tire,  we  will  thereafter 
pass  the  night  in  the  hermitage." 

While  Shri  Rama  and  the  sage  were  conversing,  the  holy 
ascetics  dwelling  in  the  hermitage,  knew  by  the  power  of  their 
Yoga,  that  these  great  beings  were  approaching  and  were  highly 
gratified. 

Having  presented  arghya  to  Shri  Vishwamitra,  they  then 
offered  hospitality  to  Shri  Ramachandra  and  Lakshmana. 
Entertained  by  those  dwelling  in  the  hermitage  who  regaled 
them  with  the  holy  traditions  and  philosophical  discourses, 
they  remained  there  for  their  evening  devotion  and  with  great 
delight  abode  in  the  hermitage  of  Kama,  the  devout  sages 
gathering  round  Shri  Vishwamitra  who  engaged  them  in 
pleasing  converse. 


53 


THE    RAA4AYANA    OF    VALMIKI 


CHAPTER    24 

The  two  primes  with  Vishwamitra  behold  the  dark  forest 
of  Taraka 

When  the  day  dawned,  the  two  princes  performed  their  daily 
devotions  and  followed  Shri  Vishwamitra  to  the  river. 

The  keepers  of  sacred  vows,  the  dwellers  in  the  holy  hermitage 
accompanied  them  to  the  river  bank  and  arranged  for  an 
excellent  boat  to  take  them  across ;  they  said  to  Shri 
Vishwamitra : — 

"  O  Great  Rishi,  do  not  delay,  please  board  the  vessel  with 
the  royal  princes,  now,  and  thus  avoid  the  heat  of  the  day." 

Shri  Vishwamitra  paid  reverence  to  the  devout  sages  and 
proceeded  to  cross  the  sacred  river.  When  the  craft  was  in 
mid-stream,  the  roar  of  the  waters  was  heard  by  Shri  Rama- 
chandra  and  his  younger  brother.  They  questioned  the  holy 
sage,  saying :  "  O  Venerable  Lord,  what  is  the  cause  of  this 
tumult  ?  " 

In  answer  to  Shri  Ramachandra,  Shri  Vishwamitra  described 
the  cause  of  the  sound  in  the  following  manner : — 

"  O  Prince,  on  Mount  Kailasha,1  Shri  Brahma  created  a  lake 
by  the  power  of  his  thought,  on  account  of  which  it  is  called 
the  lake  of  the  Mind  (Manasarovara).  The  holy  river  Sarayu 
rises  in  the  Manasa  Lake  and  flows  through  the  capital  Ayodhya, 
here  it  joins  the  sacred  stream  Gunga,  and  this  sound  is  pro- 
duced when  the  two  rivers  unite.  With  concentrated  mind, 
offer  salutations  to  them." 

The  two  royal  princes  made  obeisance  to  the  rivers,  and 
having  reached  the  southern  bank,  left  the  boat  and  proceeded 
onward.  Walking  further,  the  two  princes  beheld  a  dark  and 
terrible  forest  and  Shri  Ramachandra  again  addressed  the  Sage 
as  follows :  "  O  Great  Sage,  this  forest  looks  dark  and  sinister ; 
above  the  ceaseless  clamour  of  crickets  and  other  insects,  fearful 
beasts  can  be  heard  roaring.  The  forest  resounds  with  their 
dread  cries  while  the  harsh  and  discordant  notes  of  birds  echo 

1  Mt.  Kailasha— The  abode  of  Lord  Shiva. 
54 


BALA    KANDA 

through  it.  See,  O  Sage !  Boars,  lions,  tigers  and  elephants 
abound  there,  it  is  overgrown  with  dhara,  ashwakarna,  kujaja, 
patala,  sillea  and  tinduka  trees,1  it  is  indeed  terrifying." 

The  highly  resplendent  Sage  Vishwamitra  hearing  these  words, 
said :  "  My  son,  I  will  tell  thee  something  of  this  dark  forest. 
Formerly  there  were  two  cities  named  Malava  and  Karusha,  they 
were  both  prosperous  and  resembled  the  cities  built  by  the  gods. 
O  Rama,  in  ancient  times,  Indra  slew  the  wicked  Vritrasura 
then,  being  hungry  and  thirsty,  he  went  to  an  inauspicious 
and  isolated  place  where  he  became  distressed  on  account  of 
the  sin  of  having  slain  a  brahmin.  The  gods  and  holy  sages 
bathed  Indra  in  the  sacred  waters  of  the  Ganges,  and  purged 
away  his  sin  by  pouring  jars  of  water  charged  with  mantrams 
over  him.  In  this  way,  the  remorse  of  Indra  was  appeased, 
the  pollution  caused  by  slaying  a  brahmin  was  washed  away 
and  he  was  highly  gratified.  Purified  and  sinless,  Indra  gladly 
conferred  a  boon  on  this  land  saying :  '  These  two  cities  will 
be  known  as  Malava  and  Karusha  and  they  will  acquire  great 
renown,  their  prosperity  will  be  famed  throughout  the  earth.' 

"  When  Indra  thus  favoured  these  two  cities,  the  celestial 
beings  praised  him  and  cried :  *  Be  it  so.'  These  two  places 
soon  enjoyed  great  prosperity  and  fame.  In  the  course  of  time, 
a  perverse  yakshini1  was  born  here,  possessing  the  strength  of 
a  thousand  elephants.  Her  name  was  Taraka,  the  wife  of  Sunda, 
and  her  son  was  the  rakshasa,  Maricha,  who  was  equal  in  strength 
to  Indra  himself.  He  possessed  long  arms,  an  enormous  mouth, 
and  a  gigiantic  body.  This  terrible  rakshasa  continually  destroys 
the  people  of  these  two  lands. 

"  O  Rama,  the  wicked  Taraka  constantly  plunders  and 
devastates  these  two  countries.  Obstructing  the  road,  she  lives 
at  two  miles  distance  from  here;  let  us  enter  the  forest  of 
Taraka.  By  my  command,  O  Rama,  do  thou  slay  the  wicked 
yakshini  and  set  the  country  free.  O  Rama,  none  dares  to 
come  hither  for  fear  of  Taraka;  save  this  land  from  the 
dangerous  demoness.  This  is  why  this  forest  is  uninhabited, 
but  thou  can'st  restore  it.  This  wicked  yakshini  is  unceasingly 
bent  on  her  evil  designs." 

1  See  separate  glossary  of  Flowers  and  Trees. 

*  Yakshini — a  female  yaksha,  a  class  of  supernatural  beings  attendant  on 
the  god  of  wealth,  Kuvera. 

55 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 

CHAPTER    25 

Vishwamitra  seeks  to  convince  Rama  that  it  is  his  duty 
to  slay  Taraka 

Hearing  the  words  of  Shri  Vishwamitra,  Shri  Rama  of  limitless 
power  and  influence  uttered  the  following  auspicious  words : — 

"  O  Great  Sage,  it  is  said  that  the  yakshinis  have  little  power, 
then  how  is  it  that  Taraka  has  come  to  possess  the  strength 
of  a  thousand  elephants  ?  " 

The  mahatma  listened  to  Rama's  words  and  said :  "  O  Prince, 
I  will  relate  the  story  to  thee.  This  female  demon  has  acquired 
her  great  strength  by  virtue  of  a  boon  which  she  received. 
In  the  past,  a  powerful  yaksha  by  the  name  of  Suketu,  who  was 
virtuous  but  childless,  performed  many  yogic  practices  which 
pleased  Shri  Brahma,  who  promised  him  a  daughter  by  name 
Taraka,  and  conferred  on  her  the  strength  of  a  thousand 
elephants.  But  the  most  illustrious  Brahma  did  not  grant  a  son 
to  that  yaksha.  When  the  daughter  grew  up  and  possessed 
both  the  charm  of  youth  and  great  beauty,  her  father  gave  her 
in  marriage  to  Sunda,  the  son  of  Jambha.  After  some  time, 
the  yakshini  gave  birth  to  a  son.  His  name  was  Marietta  and  he 
was  very  powerful ;  though  born  of  yaksha  parentage  he  became 
a  rakshasa  through  a  curse.  O  Rama,  when  the  Sage  Agastya 
condemned  Sunda  to  death  by  cursing  him,  then  Taraka  and 
her  son  wished  to  devour  the  sage.  Seeing  her  running  towards 
him,  the  blessed  Sage  Agastya  cursed  Maricha  and  said '  Become 
a  demon '.  He  also  cursed  that  wicked  woman  so  that  she 
became  a  cannibal  with  a  hideous  countenance.  Shri  Agastya 
said :  *  May  thy  beauty  vanish  and  mayest  thou  become  a 
terrible  rakshasi.'  Then  Taraka,  transported  with  anger  under 
this  curse,  began  to  destroy  this  sacred  land  because  it  was  here 
that  the  Sage  Agastya  performed  his  yogic  practices. 

"  O  Rama,  thou  must  slay  this  wicked  and  impious  demon 
Taraka,  who  ravages  the  land.  For  the  good  of  the  brahmins 
and  the  king,  O  Raghava,  accomplish  this ;  do  not  hesitate 
to  destroy  this  vile  yakshini.  It  is  the  duty  of  a  warrior  to 
protect  those  of  the  four  castes.  A  prince  must  not  eschew 
5« 


BALA    KANDA 

deeds  that  are  painful  and  difficult,  for  the  preservation  of  his 
people.  It  is  according  to  the  law  of  eternal  dharma,  O  Rama, 
that  even  deeds  that  appear  ruthless,  are  permitted  to  those 
appointed  to  protect  their  subjects.  O  Raghava,  Taraka  is 
wholly  evil,  and  therefore  must  be  destroyed.  It  is  said  that 
in  the  past  Manthara,  a  daughter  of  King  Virochana,  was  slain 
by  Indra  because  she  was  the  cause  of  the  destruction  of  others. 
The  blessed  Lord  Vishnu  Himself  slew  the  wife  of  the  Sage 
Bhrigu,  devoted  to  her  husband,  and  the  mother  of  Shukra 
because  she  was  intent  on  killing  Indra.  Many  other  great- 
souled  princes  of  old  also  condemned  wicked  women  to  death. 
Therefore,  it  is  for  thee  to  fulfil  thy  duty  and  slay  this  yakshini 
without  delay." 


chapter   26 

How  the  yakshini  Taraka  was  slain 

The  son  of  Dasaratha,  firm  in  his  vows,  listened  to  the  inspiring 
words  of  the  Sage  Vishwamitra,  which  filled  him  with  ardour, 
and  with  joined  palms  he  humbly  addressed  him : — 

"  To  fulfil  the  commands  of  my  royal  sire  and  to  honour  his 
promise,  I  deem  it  my  duty  to  act  according  to  thy  instructions 
without  hesitation.  My  father,  the  emperor,  at  the  time  of  my 
departure  from  Ayodhya  bade  me  carry  out  thy  injunctions 
— O  Muni,  I  shall  honour  them.  I  am  prepared  to  execute 
thy  commands,  O  Rishi,  because  it  will  lead  to  the  benefit 
of  the  brahmins  and  the  king,  and  will  also  bring  happiness 
to  the  people  of  this  land." 

Having  spoken  thus,  Shri  Rama  grasped  his  bow  and, 
twanging  the  string,  filled  all  the  cardinal  points  with  the  sound. 
The  denizens  of  the  forest  were  terrified,  and  Taraka  was 
overcome  with  helpless  rage.  Full  of  wrath  that  yakshini  ran 
in  the  direction  from  which  the  sound  came  and  Shri  Rama- 
chandra  beholding  that  gigantic  and  misshapen  monster  was 
incensed  and  said  to  Lakshmana :  "  O  Brother,  behold  this 
57 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 

fearful  yakshini  of  formidable  size,  whose  very  aspect  would 
strike  terror  into  timorous  hearts.  See,  O  Lakshmana,  how  I 
shall  cut  off  her  ears  and  nose  and  put  her  to  flight !  She  is 
horrible,  versed  in  black  magic  and  hard  to  subdue,  but  it  is 
not  proper  to  deprive  a  woman  of  her  life.  A  woman  is  worthy 
of  protection,  therefore,  I  shall  incapacitate  her,  by  depriving 
her  of  the  power  of  motion  thus  preventing  her  from  doing 
further  mischief/* 

While  Shri  Rama  was  still  speaking,  the  dreadful  Taraka  ran  to- 
wards him  roaring  with  uplifted  arms.  The  Rishi  Vishwamitra 
approaching  her  encouraged  Rama,  with  a  shout,  crying,  "  Jai 
to  the  descendant  of  Raghu  ".  Notwithstanding,  Taraka  raised 
a  thick  cloud  of  dust  and  for  a  while  Shri  Rama  and  Lakshmana 
could  see  nothing.  Then  the  yakshini  by  the  power  of  magic 
caused  a  shower  of  rocks  to  rain  on  the  two  brothers  and  Rama 
was  now  filled  with  wrath.  Parrying  the  rain  of  rocks  and 
advancing  towards  her,  he  cut  off  both  her  hands.  Then  Shri 
Lakshmana  severed  the  nose  and  ears  of  the  asuri  who  had 
already  been  deprived  of  her  hands.  Assuming  various  forms, 
she  tried  to  deceive  the  princes  by  vanishing  away.  Then  from 
her  hiding  place,  she  showered  heavy  rocks  on  them,  and  a  rain 
of  stones  fell  on  every  side. 

Shri  Vishwamitra,  who  stood  watching  the  combat,  now  cried : 
"  Enough,  she  does  not  deserve  further  mercy ;  should'st  thou 
spare  her,  she  will  gain  strength  through  her  magic  powers 
and  will  again  break  up  our  holy  rites.  The  evening  is 
approaching  and  in  the  evening  rakshasas  are  overcome  with 
difficulty ;  slay  her,  therefore,  without  delay." 

Then  Shri  Vishwamitra  pointed  out  the  concealed  yakshini 
to  Rama,  who  drew  from  his  quiver  arrows  capable  of  following 
sound  and  surrounded  her  with  them.  The  powerful  female 
demon,  an  adept  in  occult  powers,  encompassed  by  the  rain 
of  arrows,  advanced  roaring,  towards  the  princes.  With  an 
arrow,  Shri  Rama  pierced  the  heart  of  the  wicked  yakshini, 
who  fell  to  the  ground  and  expired.  Seeing  the  terrible  yakshini 
slain,  Indra  and  other  celestial  beings  worshipped  Shri  Rama, 
crying :  "  Well  done,  well  done,  O  Holy  Rama !  "  All  the  gods 
filled  with  joy,  said  to  Shri  Vishwamitra :  "  O  Muni,  may 
prosperity  attend  thee,  Indra  and  the  gods  are  gratified  with 
5» 


BALA  KANDA 
Shri  Ramachandra's  feat  of  arms,  show  thy  special  favour  to  him 
and  deliver  to  him  the  two  kinds  of  weapons,  natural  and  super- 
natural, belonging  to  Krishashwa.  Present  Shri  Ramachandra, 
who  is  worthy  to  receive  them,  with  all  the  other  mighty 
weapons,  he  is  wholly  devoted  to  thee ;  these  two  princes  are 
destined  to  achieve  great  things." 

Having  uttered  these  words,  the  gods  bowed  down  to  the 
Sage  Vishwamitra  and  returned  to  their  abode. 

Evening  fell,  and  the  holy  sage  gladdened  by  the  slaying  of 
the  wicked  Taraka  by  Shri  Rama,  smelt  the  head  of  the  prince 
and  addressed  him  thus :  "  O  Rama,  this  night  we  will  remain 
here  and  to-morrow  morning  proceed  to  my  hermitage." 

Shri  Rama  rejoiced  to  hear  the  muni's  words  and  rested  happily 
during  the  night  in  the  forest. 

On  the  day  that  Taraka  was  slain,  the  forest,  freed  from 
the  curse,  adorned  with  champaka,1  ashoka,1  mango  and  other 
trees,  looked  as  charming  as  the  forest  of  Chitraratha.2 

Shri  Ramachandra,  whom  the  siddhas  praised  for  slaying 
Taraka,  passed  the  night  in  the  forest,  awaiting  the  dawn. 


CHAPTER    27 

Shi  Rama  is  given  the  celestial  weapons 

Having  passed  the  night  resting  in  the  forest,  the  illustrious 
Sage  Vishwamitra  spoke  to  Rama  smilingly,  in  sweet  accents : — 

"  O  Prince  of  Great  Renown,  I  am  entirely  satisfied  with  thee 
and  am  happy  to  give  thee  these  weapons  by  means  of  which 
thou  shalt  be  able  to  conquer  and  subdue  all  thine  enemies, 
whether  devas,  asuras  or  nagas.8  Accept  these  divine  weapons,4 
O  Rama.    Here  is  the  great  celestial  disc  and  the  Dunda  weapon, 

1  Champaka — a  type  of  magnolia.  \  For  full  list  of  trees 

Ashoka — a  tree  resembling  the  coconut.      J     lee  separate  glossary, 

*  Chitraratha — The  king  ofthe  gandharvas,  q.v.  page  3. 
■  Nagas— The  serpent  race. 

*  Weapons — for  full  list  see  separate  glossary. 

59 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 

the  Disc  of  Dharma,  the  Kala  weapon,  the  Disc  of  Vishnu  and 
the  irresistible  Weapon  of  Indra.  0  Great  Prince,  here  is  the 
Mace  and  the  Spear  of  Mahendra  the  Brahma-  Shira  and  the 
Ishika.  O  Mighty-armed  One,  take  the  Shankara  weapon  and 
the  two  great  maces  Koumoduki  and  Lohitamukhi.  O  Great 
Prince  receive  also  the  mighty  Dharma-pasha,  the  Kala-pasha 
and  the  Varuna-pasha  and  two  other  maces  called  Shoshka  and 
Ashani ;  the  Pinaka  weapon,  the  Narayana  weapon  and  the 
fire-emitting  weapon  Agneya. 

"  O  Rama,  take  this  wind  weapon,  Vayuvya,  and  the  horse- 
headed  weapon,  Hayashira,  also  the  Krauncha  weapon.  I  give 
thee  further  two  powers  and  the  weapons  called  Kankala, 
Mushala,  Rapala  and  Kinkini.  O  Mighty  Prince,  I  confer  on 
thee  the  two  supernatural  weapons  named  Vidyadhara  and 
Nandana,  useful  in  fighting  the  Asuras. 

"  Take  this  jewel  among  swords,  which  I  give  to  thee,  O 
Mighty-armed  One,  and  another  supernatural  weapon  named 
Gandharva,  and  here,  O  Rama,  is  one  very  dear  to  me  called 
Manava.  Here  are  Prashaman,  Soura,  Praswaprana,  Darpana 
and  that  which  has  the  power  of  drying  up,  and  the  pain- 
inflicting  weapon  causing  lamentation.  I  grant  thee  also  the 
strength  to  bear  the  Madana-astra  presented  to  me  by  Kandarpa 
which  creates  in  man  unbearable  sexual  desire  so  that  he  is 
unable  to  fight.  Here  also  is  the  Paisha-astra  and  the  Mohan- 
astra. 

"  O !  Illustrious  Prince,  receive  also  the  weapon  that  produces 
inertia,  and  the  great  Saumana  weapon.  O  Great  Prince,  here 
are  the  Samvartta,  Moushalya,  Sattyastra  and  Mayadhara,  and 
take  the  Tajaprabha  by  means  of  which  the  strength  and  courage 
of  the  foe  are  withdrawn,  and  also  the  Shishira  which  chills  and 
the  Somastra  and  Twashtra. 

"  0  Rama,  now  thou  art  all-powerful  and  knowest  the  secrets 
of  magic,  yet  take  the  Bava,  Shitesu  and  Manava  astra  also. 
O  Prince,  receive  the  Paramodara-astra,  take  all  these  weapons 
from  me." 

Then  the  great  Visbwamitra  turned  his  face  to  the  east  and 
performed  the  purificatory  rites  with  joy,  conferring  on  Rama 
the  mantrams1  for  employing  the  weapons  and  instructing  him 

1  Mantraraa — sacred  formulas. 

60 


BALA    KANDA 

in  the  methods  unknown  even  to  the  gods.  All  these  weapons 
did  Shri  Vishwamitra  confei  on  Rama,  and  he,  repeating  the 
appropriate  mantrams,  caused  their  presiding  deities  to  appear 
before  him.  Approaching  with  joined  palms,  they  said  :  "  O 
Prince  of  the  House  of  Raghu,  we  are  thy  servants  and  will  obey 
thy  behests." 

Shri  Rama,  having  surveyed  and  blessed  them,  answered : 
"  Come  and  serve  me  when  I  summon  you." 

Thereafter,  Shri  Ramachandra  offering  salutations  to  the 
venerable  Sage  Vishwamitra,  said :  "  Let  us  proceed  further, 
my  Lord." 


chapter  28 

He  is  instructed  in  their  use 

Having  received  the  weapons  and  instructions  for  their  use, 
Shri  Rama  addressed  the  sage  in  charming  accents  as  they 
proceeded  onward. 

He  said :  "  O  Blessed  One,  by  thy  grace,  I  have  received 
weapons  which  even  the  devas  and  asuras  cannot  easily  obtain. 
Be  pleased  to  tell  me  further,  how  I  may  withdraw  these  weapons 
when  they  are  discharged  ?  " 

Then  the  supremely  patient  and  holy  sage  taught  Shri 
Ramachandra  the  method  of  withdrawing  the  mantra-propelled 
weapons  and  gave  him  more  by  the  name  of  Satya-vana, 
Satya-kirti,  Dhrishta,  Raphasa,  Fratiharatara,  Parangmukha, 
Avangmukha,  Lakshya,  Alakshya,  Drirnabha  and  Sunabhuka, 
Dasharsha,  Shutavaktra,  Dasha-shirsha,  Shatodara,  Dharma- 
nabha  and  Maha-nabha,  Dunda-nabha  and  Swanabhuka, 
Jyotisha  and  Shakuna  and  the  two  weapons  Nirashya  and 
Vimala,  also  the  Yogandhara  and  Vinidra,  Ditya  and  Praman- 
thana,  Shuchivahu,  Mahavanu,  Nishkali,  Virucha,  Sarchi-mali 
Dhrio'  and  Mali,  Vrittiman  and  Ruchira,  Pitryia  and  Soamanas- 
vidhuta  and  Makara,  Karavira  with  Rati,  Dhana  and  Dhanya. 

The  holy  sage  said,  "  O  Rama,  receive  also  Kamarupa, 
Kamaruchi,  Moha  and  Avarana,  also  Jrim  Bhala,  Sarpa-natha 
61 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 

with  Sandhana  and  Varuna.  Receive  from  me,  O  Rama,  the 
Krishashwa  which  assumes  any  form — O  Prince,  mayest  thou 
be  triumphant,  thou  art  worthy  to  possess  these  weapons ". 
Shri  Rama  answered  "  May  it  be  so,  my  Lord  ". 

The  holy  rishi1  then  placed  the  divine  weapons  before  Rama, 
some  of  which  shone  like  fire,  others  with  the  colour  of  smoke 
and  yet  others  which  resembled  the  sun  and  moon.  With 
joined  palms  the  deities  presiding  over  them  addressed  Shri 
Rama  with  submission,  saying :  "  O  Prince,  we  are  at  thy 
service,  what  would'st  thou  have  us  accomplish  ?  "  Shri  Rama 
answered :  "  When  called  to  mind  in  the  time  of  need,  grant 
me  aid,  now  depart,  all  of  yon." 

Offering  obeisance  to  Shri  Ramachandra,  they  replied :  "  Be 
it  so,  my  Lord,"  and  returned  to  their  abode. 

Shri  Rama  then  questioned  the  great  rishi,  saying :  "  O 
Spiritual  Sovereign,  what  is  this  that  resembles  a  dark  cloud 
near  the  mountain  ?  It  would  seem  to  be  a  grove  of  trees, 
pleasing  to  the  sight,  filled  with  deer.  I  hear  birds  singing 
sweetly,  have  we  then  passed  the  dangerous  forest  which  was 
a  cause  of  fear  ?  O  Lord,  let  us  rest  here  at  peace ;  tell  me, 
whose  hermitage  is  this  ?  O  Great  Muni,  are  we  now  in  thine 
own  hermitage,  where  the  wicked  demons,  the  slayers  of 
brahmins  obstruct  thy  sacrifice  ?  O  Blessed  One,  be  pleased 
to  show  me  the  place  of  thy  sacrifice.  O  Wise  One*  I  will 
slay  the  meddlesome  demons  who  hinder  thy  devotions.  Be 
gracious  enough  to  enlighten  me  in  the  matter,  O  Sage." 


CHAPTER    29 

Vishwamitra  relates  the  story  of  Us  hermitage 
and  commences  the  sacrifice 

To  die  most  glorious  Shri  Ramachandra  making  enquiry 
concerning  the  forest,  the  illustrious  Sage  Vishwamitra  made 
answer : — 

1  Rishi — an  illumined  sage,  who  has  bad  a  vision  of  Truth  or  Reality. 
62 


BALA    KANDA 

"  O  Rama,  this  is  the  place  at  which  the  Blessed  Lord  Vishnu, 
the  first  among  the  gods,  dwelt,  observing  his  yogic  practices 
for  immeasurable  years  and  previous  to  that,  it  belonged  to 
the  glorious  Vamana.1  This  spot  is  called  Siddha-ashrama, 
for  here,  these  great  souls  practised  austerities  with  success. 
At  that  time,  Bali  the  son  of  King  Virochana,  conquered  Indra 
and  other  devas,  together  with  the  deities  of  the  wind  and  he 
ruled  over  the  three  worlds.  When  Bali  initiated  a  sacrifice, 
the  devas,  under  the  leadership  of  Agni1  approached  Shri 
Vishnu  in  this  hermitage  and  said :  *  O  Lord,  the  son  of 
Virochana,  King  Bali  is  observing  a  great  sacrifice ;  while  it 
is  yet  incomplete,  come  to  our  aid.  The  Lord  grants  the 
requests  of  those  who  seek  His  favour,  therefore,  by  the  power 
of  Thy  Yoga  and  for  our  own  good,  take  the  form  of  a  dwarf 
(Vamana)  and  secure  our  welfare.'  Meantime,  O  Rama,  the 
Sage  Kashyapa,  resplendent  as  fire,  who  was  endowed  with 
supreme  lustre  by  virtue  of  his  yogic  practices,  with  his  spouse 
Aditi,  having  completed  a  thousand  years'  austerities,  began  to 
praise  Madhusudana,  the  conferrer  of  boons,  saying :  '  O 
Supreme  Purusha,8  Thou  art  adored  through  austerity  and  Thou 
dost  grant  the  fruit  of  austerity,  Thy  nature  is  knowledge  and 
asceticism,  it  is  by  virtue  of  austerity  that  I  behold  Thee.  O 
Lord,  in  Thy  body  I  see  the  whole  world  animate  and  inanimate. 
In  Thee  Who  art  beginningless  and  indescribable,  I  take  refuge.' 

"  The  blessed  Vishnu  was  pleased  with  this  prayer  and  said 
to  the  sinless  Sage :  '  O  Kashyapa,  mayest  thou  see  perfection, 
thou  hast  merited  a  boon,  ask  what  thou  desirest.' 

"  Then  Kashyapa,  the  son  of  Marichi,  answered :  *  O  Blessed 
Lord,  Aditi,  the  gods  and  I  beseech  Thee  to  grant  this  boon 
— Become  the  son  of  my  sinless  wife  and  myself.  O  Lord, 
become  the  younger  brother  of  Indra  and  assist  the  sorrow- 
stricken  devas.  This  spot,  by  Thy  grace,  shall  then  be  known 
as  Siddha-Ashrama.'    (Hermitage  of  the  Perfect  Ones.) 

"  Upon  this,  the  resplendent  Vishnu  was  born  of  the  womb 
of  Aditi  as  the  incarnation  Vamana  and  disguised  as  a  mendicant, 
he  approached  King  Bali.    Of  him,  he  requested  a  piece  of 

1  Vamana — An  incarnation  of  Shri  Vishnu  as  the  holy  Dwarf. 
»  Agni — The  god  of  fire. 

1  Purusha — The  Supreme  Being,  the  Soul  of  the  Universe.  Literally  the  Lord 
of  the  body,  called  the  city  of  the  nine  gates. 

63  F 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 

ground  that  could  be  covered  by  three  strides,  and  having  obtained 
what  he  asked,  he  covered  the  whole  universe  in  three  steps. 

"  This  restful  hermitage  formerly  belonging  to  Vamana, 
whose  devotee  I  am,  is  enjoyed  by  me.  Here  the  rakshasas 
wreak  destruction.  O  Lion  among  men,  remain  here  and  slay 
them.  O  Rama,  to-day  let  us  enterthe  Siddha-Ashrama  together. 
O  Friend,  this  hermitage  is  not  only  mine  but  thine  also." 

Accompanied  by  Shri  Ramachandra  and  Lakshmana,  the 
holy  sage  entered  the  hermitage,  which  appeared  as  beautiful 
as  the  autumn  moon  attended  by  the  planet  Punarvasu.1  When 
the  sages  dwelling  in  the  Siddha-Ashrama  perceived  Shri 
Vishwamitra,  they  rose  and  saluted  him  with  joy.  Having  duly 
honoured  the  resplendent  sage,  they  entertained  the  princes  in 
a  fitting  manner. 

Having  rested  awhile,  the  two  princes  humbly  and  respectfully 
addressed  the  holy  sage,  saying :  "  O  Great  Sage,  inaugurate 
thy  sacrifice  to-day,  may  it  be  attended  with  good  fortune. 
This  place  is  the  Siddha-Ashrama,  we  wish  thee  success  in  thy 
undertaking." 

Thereupon  the  great  sage  with  due  preparation,  his  mind 
subdued,  began  the  sacrifice  while  the  two  princes  kept  vigil. 
Having  passed  the  night  in  this  manner,  in  accordance  with 
the  prescribed  rules,  they  performed  their  ablutions,  repeating 
the  mantram  silently,  they  then  paid  respect  to  Shri  Vishwamitra 
and  occupied  their  seats  as  do  those  performing  a  fire-sacrifice. 


chapter    30 

Maricka  and  Sttvaku  obstruct  the  sacrifice  and  are  slain 
by  Rama 

The  two  princes,  knowing  what  was  appropriate  in  respect  to 
time  and  place  and  skilled  in  the  art  of  conquering  their  foes, 
uttered  words  fitting  to  the  place  and  occasion. 

1  Punarvasu — The  seventh  of  the  lunar  aiterisms,  called  Nakshatras  or  wives 
of  the  moon.    Punarvasu  is  the  most  beloved. 

64 


BALA    KANDA 

They  said:  "0  Blessed  One,  we  desire  to  hear  at  what 
moment  in  the  course  of  the  sacrifice,  the  two  demons  appear  ? 
It  is  essential  for  us  to  be  acquainted  with  the  matter,  to  forestall 
their  attack." 

The  dwellers  in  the  Siddha-ashrama,  hearing  the  words  of 
the  princes,  and  finding  them  eager  to  fight  the  demons,  praised 
them  saying :  "  O  Princes,  from  now  on,  keep  watch  over  the 
sacrifice  for  six  days  j  the  Sage  Vishwamitra  having  begun  the 
rite  will  observe  a  strict  silence  during  that  time." 

On  this,  the  two  illustrious  princes  kept  watch  in  the  Tapovana 
forest  continuously  for  six  days  without  sleeping.  Armed  with 
bow  and  arrows  they  guarded  the  rishi  and  his  sacrifice  with 
firm  resolve.  Five  days  passed  without  interruption  and  on 
the  sixth  day  Shri  Ramachandra  said  to  Lakshmana  :  "  Brother, 
be  prepared  to-day." 

As  Shri  Rama  uttered  these  words  concerning  the  approaching 
conflict  with  the  demons,  the  altar  fire  blazed  up  suddenly. 
The  officiating  brahmin,  the  priest  and  Shri  Vishwamitra,  who 
were  watching,  beheld  all  the  sacrificial  implements  set  on  fire. 

The  sacrifice  of  the  holy  sage  still  proceeding,  a  great  and 
fearful  clamour  resounded  in  the  firmament.  As  in  the  rainy 
season,  clouds  cover  the  sky,  so  the  demons  by  the  power  of 
magic  began  to  course  through  the  air. 

Maricha  and  Suvahu  and  other  demons  surrounding  the  altar, 
let  fall  torrents  of  blood.  Seeing  the  altar  deluged  with  blood, 
Shri  Ramachandra  and  Lakshmana  were  filled  with  anger  and 
ran  to  discover  the  cause.  Then  they  saw  Maricha  and  other 
demons  in  the  sky.  Raghava  beholding  the  demons  rushing 
towards  him,  said  to  Lakshmana,  "  O  Lakshmana,  see  these 
evil  flesh-eating  demons,  I  shall  destroy  them  with  the  Manava- 
weapon,  as  the  wind  scatters  the  clouds  ". 

So  saying,  Shri  Ramachandra  hurled  the  shining  Manava 
weapon  at  them  and  striking  the  breast  of  Maricha,  inflicted 
a  wound.  Thus  smitten,  the  demon  was  flung  into  the  sea, 
a  distance  of  a  hundred  miles.  Perceiving  Maricha  reeling, 
struck  senseless  by  the  Manava  weapon,  Shri  Ramachandra 
addressed  Lakshmana,  saying :  "  Behold  the  power  of  this  great 
weapon  created  by  the  muni !  Yet,  though  Maricha  has  been 
deprived  of  his  senses,  he  is  not  dead ;  verily  I  shall  now  destroy 
65 


1HE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 

those  wicked,  merciless  and  sinful  blood-drinking  demons  who 
obstruct  the  holy  sacrifice."  So  saying,  he  seized  the  fire- 
weapon  and  discharged  it  at  the  breast  of  Suvahu,  who  straight- 
way fell  to  the  ground  and  expired.  On  this,  Shri  Rama 
destroyed  the  remaining  demons  with  the  air-weapon  (Vayuvya). 

Thus  by  slaying  the  obstructors  of  the  sacrifice  did  Shri 
Ramachandra  bring  delight  to  the  hearts  of  the  sages  and  was 
worshipped  by  them  as  was  formerly  the  victorious  Indra. 

When  the  sacrifice  had  been  successfully  completed,  perceiving 
the  world  to  be  freed  from  the  interference  of  the  asuras,  the 
Rishi  Vishwamitra  said  to  Rama : — 

"  O  Mighty-armed  Prince,  to-day  I  have  fulfilled  my  spiritual 
purpose,  thou  hast  obeyed  the  commands  of  thy  Guru  perfectly, 
truly  thou  hast  made  the  Siddha-Ashrama  worthy  of  its  name." 


CHAPTER    3  I 

Vishwamitra  starts  out  toitk  the  two  princes  to  attend 
King  Janaka's  sacrifice 

The  great  hero,  the  ever-cheerful  Rama,  together  with  Laksh- 
mana  having  successfully  assisted  Shri  Vishwamitra,  passed  the 
night  in  the  hermitage. 

At  dawn,  after  purifying  themselves,  they  approached  Shri 
Vishwamitra  and  offered  obeisance  to  him  and  the  other  sages. 
Bowing  down  before  the  great  muni,  who  was  as  resplendent 
as  a  blazing  fire,  they  addressed  him  in  submissive  tones,  saying : 
"  O  Great  Rishi,  we  are  both  thy  humble  servants,  what  further 
commands  are  there  for  us  ?    We  are  here  to  obey." 

The  other  rishis,  led  by  Shri  Vishwamitra,  listened  to  the 
words  of  Shri  Ramachandra  and  answered  saying :  "  O  Great 
One,  the  King  of  Mithila,  the  righteous  Janaka  is  performing 
a  holy  sacrifice  and  we  shall  attend  it.  O  Great  Beings,  be 
pleased  to  accompany  us ;  there  you  will  see  a  rare  and  wonderful 
bow.  In  ancient  days  this  bow  was  given  by  the  devas  to 
66 


BALA    KANDA 

Janaka,  it  is  exceedingly  heavy  and  splendid.  Neither  gandharvas 
nor  asuras  can  bend  this  great  bow,  how  much  less  man? 
To  test  their  skill,  great  kings  have  come  to  the  assembly  of 
King  Janaka,  but  none  has  succeeded  in  raising  the  bow  and 
stringing  it.  O  Illustrious  One,  let  us  go  and  see  the  sacrifice 
of  the  King  of  Mithila  and  also  that  marvellous  bow.  In  former 
days,  King  Janaka  performed  a  sacrifice  and  the  fruit  of  it  was 
the  great  bow  which  he  obtained  from  the  gods  who  instructed 
him  saying  :  *  Place  this  bow  in  the  sacrificial  chamber  and  let 
it  be  worshipped  with  incense,  perfume  and  lights  \" 

Shri  Vishwamitra  having  related  these  facts,  started  out 
accompanied  by  the  two  princes  and  other  sages.  Invoking 
the  Vanadevata  (Forest  Deity)  he  said  to  him :  "  My  sacrifice 
has  come  to  a  successful  conclusion,  may  happiness  be  thine. 
I  am  leaving  the  Siddha-Ashrama  for  the  banks  of  the  sacred 
river  Gunga  on  the  slopes  of  the  Himalayas,  situated  in  the 
domain  of  King  Janaka." 

Then  the  sage  reverently  circumambulated  the  hermitage  and 
turned  northwards.  As  Shri  Vishwamitra  entered  upon  his 
journey,  the  sages  skilled  in  the  knowledge  of  the  science  of 
Brahman,  accompanied  him  with  their  chattels  placed  on 
hundreds  of  waggons.  The  birds  and  beasts  of  the  hermitage 
also  followed  them  for  a  long  way  until  the  holy  muni  requested 
them  to  turn  back. 

The  sages  and  the  holy  muni  reached  the  banks  of  the  river 
Shona  at  sunset  and,  having  bathed  and  recited  their  evening 
prayers,  performed  the  fire  sacrifice. 

Shri  Ramachandra  and  Prince  Lakshmana  then  offered 
salutations  to  Shri  Vishwamitra  and  the  other  rishis,  and  sat 
down  before  them.  Thereafter  Shri  Rama  cheerfully  enquired : 
"  O  Lord,  what  country  is  this,  covered  with  verdant  groves  ? 
Be  gracious  enough  to  relate  everything  concerning  it." 

The  great  ascetic  of  firm  vows,  was  pleased  to  hear  these 
words  and,  sitting  amidst  the  sages,  he  described  the  country 
fully  to  them. 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 


CHAPTER    32 

Viskzoamitra  tells  of  his  ancestors  and  the  dynasty 
of  King  Kusha 

"  O  Rama,  in  times  of  yore,  there  was  a  king  named  Kusha, 
he  was  the  son  of  a  brahmin,  a  noted  ascetic,  faithful  to  his  vows, 
conversant  with  dharma  and  ever  revered  by  the  virtuous.  He 
wedded  a  high-born  woman  of  great  beauty  named  Bhidharvi, 
and  begat  four  sons,  each  resembling  himself.  Their  names 
were  Rushamba,  Rushanabha,  Umurita-rajasa  and  Basu ; 
these  four  princes  were  mighty  and  active,  and  desirous  of 
teaching  them  the  duties  of  a  kshatriya,  die  truthful  and  righteous 
King  Kusha  addressed  them  as  follows  : — 

"  *  O  My  Sons,  protect  and  nourish  your  subjects,  this  practice' 
is  productive  of  great  merit.* 

"  In  order  to  carry  out  the  instructions  of  their  sire,  these 
princes  founded  four  cities  and  named  them  after  themselves. 
The  mighty  Kushamba  called  his  city  Kaushambi,  and  the 
righteous  Rushanabha  founded  the  city  of  Mahodaya.  O  Rama, 
Prince  Umurita-rajasa  founded  the  city  named  Dhar-maranya 
and  the  Prince  Basu  called  his  city  Giribrat,  also  named  Basumati. 
This  city  was  surrounded  by  five  mountain  peaks  and  the 
river  Magadhi  or  Shona  meandering  through  the  mountains 
resembled  a  lovely  garland.  O  Rama,  this  stream  the  Magadhi 
flows  towards  the  east  and  irrigates  the  fruitful  fields  on  either 
bank. 

"  O  Prince  of  Raghu,  Rushanabha  took  in  wedlock  a  nymph 
named  Ghritachi  and  by  her  had  one  hundred  beautiful 
daughters,  who  on  reaching  maturity  were  delightful  to  look 
upon.  One  day,  clad  in  lovely  dresses,  in  beauty  of  form  un- 
paralleled they  wandered  in  the  garden  like  lightning  amidst 
the  clouds.  Singing,  dancing  and  playing  on  instruments  they 
seemed  to  be  divine  forms  which  had  materialised  and  des- 
cended on  the  earth,  or  like  the  stars  in  the  firmament. 

"  Seeing  those  lovely  and  virtuous  princesses,  Vayu  the  wind 


BALA    KANDA 

god  thus  addressed  them :  '  I  entreat  you  all  to  be  wedded 
to  me ;  give  up  your  mortal  form,  I  will  render  you  immortal. 
Remember  youth  is  passing  and  youth  among  mortals  passes 
even  more  swiftly ;    weddedtome,youwilibebeautifulforever.' 

"  The  damsels  listened  to  the  improper  speech  of  the  wind 
god  and  replied  mockingly :  *  O  Deity  of  the  Wind,  thou 
knowest  all  that  is  passing  in  the  hearts  of  men,  but  we  know 
what  is  passing  in  thy  heart.  Why  dost  thou  insult  us,  O 
Wind  ?  O  Vayu,  who  art  renowned  for  thy  wisdom,  we  virgins 
by  the  power  of  our  devotion  and  self-control  can  effect  thy 
downfall,  but  because  the  merits  of  the  righteous  come  to  nought 
when  they  cause  harm  to  others,  we  shall  preserve  our  sacred 
vows  inviolate.  O  Stupid  One,  heaven  forfend  that  we  choose 
husbands  for  ourselves  without  first  seeking  the  approval  of  our 
honoured  sire.  He  is  as  a  god  to  us  and  our  master,  and  we 
shall  wed  the  husbands  he  chooses  for  us.* 

"  The  wind  god  was  enraged  and  entering  their  bodies, 
twisted  and  distorted  them.  Thus  afflicted,  the  princesses  in 
tears,  approached  their  father  for  assistance. 

"  The  king  was  grieved  to  sec  his  daughters  in  this  condition 
and  said :  *  O  speak,  what  has  occurred  ?  Who,  disregarding 
justice,  has  deformed  you  ?  Tell  me  all.'  The  monarch  was 
deeply  moved  by  this  event  and  bis  heart  became  heavy." 


chapter  33 

King  Kushanabha's  hundred  daughters 

When  the  hundred  princesses  were  thus  questioned  by  the  king 
their  father,  they  placed  their  heads  at  his  feet  and  answered : 
"  The  wind  god,  who  pervades  all,  has  entered  the  evil  path 
and  desired  us  to  forsake  virtuous  conduct.  We  told  him  we 
were  not  free  to  choose  our  way  of  life  since  our  father  was 
still  living  and  that  he  should  consult  thee  if  he  wished  to  wed 
us,  but  that  sinful  god,  disregarding  our  request  has  twisted 
and  deformed  our  bodies  in  this  manner." 
«9 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 

The  great  king  hearing  the  complaint  of  the  hundred  virgins, 
said  to  them :  "  You  have  acted  nobly  by  practising  forbearance 
towards  the  deity.  It  is  meet  that  the  generous-minded  should 
exercise  forbearance,  you  have  added  to  the  honour  of  our 
dynasty.  Forbearance  is  the  chief  ornament  of  both  man  and 
woman,  you  have  achieved  something  rare ;  few  are  capable 
of  such  forbearance.  O  Virgins,  forbearance  is  charity,  forbear- 
ance is  truth,  forbearance  is  sacrifice.  A  man's  true  glory  is 
forbearance ;  forbearance  is  dharma.  The  world  is  established 
in  forbearance." 

Having  spoken  thus,  the  princesses  were  comforted,  and  the 
king  dismissed  them.  Then  the  monarch,  mighty  like  a  god, 
summoned  his  ministers  and  consulted  them  regarding  the 
alliance  of  his  daughters  to  suitable  families  at  the  proper  time 
and  place. 

Now  a  great  muni  named  Chuli  full  of  glory  derived  from 
prolonged  celibacy  and  highly  virtuous,  was  engaged  in  sacred 
austerities  for  the  purpose  of  spiritual  liberation. 

At  that  place,  the  virgin  daughter  of  the  nymph  Urmila, 
named  Somada,  began  to  minister  to  the  muni.  She  attended 
on  the  great  sage  for  a  long  time  with  undeviating  faith  and 
devotion  and  her  Guru  was  pleased  with  her ;  he  said  to  her : 
"lam  pleased  with  thee,  what  desire  of  thine  shall  I  fulfil  ?  " 

Perceiving  the  muni  to  be  highly  pleased,  that  sweet-voiced 
nymph  acquainted  with  the  art  of  conversation  made  answer 
to  him :  "  O  King  of  Kings,  I  desire  to  bear  a  son,  resplendent 
with  divine  power,  a  worshipper  of  God  and  devoted  to  dharma. 
I  have  no  husband,  nor  do  I  wish  to  be  the  wife  of  any,  as  I 
am  a  brahmacharini,1  therefore,  by  virtue  of  thy  Yoga,  grant  me 
a  son  produced  by  the  power  of  thy  thought." 

The  divine  Sage  Chuli  was  pleased  to  hear  these  words 
and  granted  her  a  son  named  Brahmadatta,  by  the  power  of 
his  mind.  Brahmadatta  became  King  of  Kampila  and  was  as 
prosperous  as  Indra  in  heaven.  King  Kushanabha  resolved  to 
give  his  daughters  in  marriage  to  King  Brahmadatta.  Kushan- 
abha requested  King  Brahmadatta  to  visit  him  and  joyfully 
gave  him  his  daughters  in  marriage. 

1  Brahmachari  or  brahmacharini — male  or  female  celibate  religious  student 
who  lives  with  the  teacher  and  is  devoted  to  the  practice  of  spiritual  discipline. 

70 


BALA    KANDA 

O  Ramaji,  King  Brahmadatta,  who  was  equal  to  India  in  glory 
wedded  the  princesses  one  by  one  by  taking  their  hands  in  his. 
Through  the  touch  of  his  hand,  the  princesses  were  freed  from 
their  deformity  and  restored  to  their  former  beauty.  When 
King  Kushnabha  beheld  his  daughters  released  from  their 
disfigurement  and  restored  to  their  former  beauty  he  was  filled 
with  joy. 

Thus  did  the  King  Kushnabha  give  his  daughters  in  marriage 
to  King  Brahmadatta  and  then  commanded  their  preceptors 
to  accompany  them  to  the  court  of  his  son-in-law. 

Somada  was  delighted  with  the  union  of  her  son  to  the 
damsels  and  receiving  them  with  great  affection,  commended 
the  virtuous  King  Kushanabha. 


chapter   34 

His  son,  Gadhi,  is  the  father  of  Vishwamitra 

"  O  RAMAJI,  after  the  wedding  of  his  daughters,  the  sinless 
King  Kushanabha  prepared  to  perform  a  sacrifice  in  order  to 
obtain  a  son. 

"At  the  inauguration  of  the  sacrifice,  the  munificent  King 
Kusha,  son  of  Shri  Brahma,  said  to  Kushanabha :  '  O  my  Son, 
thou  wilt  obtain  a  son  like  thyself,  he  should  be  named  Gadhi, 
he  will  bring  thee  immortal  renown.' 

"After  some  time  a  son  was  born  to  the  wise  King  Kushanabha 
who  was  a  lover  of  virtue,  and  his  name  was  Gadhi.  This 
Gadhi,  O  Rama,  was  my  virtuous  father1  and  because  I  was 
born  in  the  family  of  Kusha  I  was  called  Kaushika. 

"  I  had,  O  Prince,  an  elder  sister  named  Satyavati,  who 
became  the  faithful  spouse  of  Richika.  When  her  lord  died, 
she  ascended  to  heaven  and  took  the  form  of  the  Kaushiki  river. 
The  river  is  sacred  and  beautiful,  and  its  waters  confer  merit 
on  men.  To  bless  the  world  Satyavati  became  the  river  Sowing 
near  the  Himalayas. 

1  The  Rishi  Vishwamitra  b  still  speaking  here. 

n 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALAflKI 

"  O  Prince,  through  lore  of  my  sister,  I  dwell  on  the  banks 
of  the  Kaushiki  river  near  the  Himalayas. 

"  Established  in  truth,  faithful  to  her  lord,  that  sister  of  mine, 
named  Satyavati  is  to-day  the  river  Kaushiki,  great  among 
streams  and  highly  fortunate. 

"  O  Rama,  in  order  to  perform  a  sacrifice,  I  went  to  the 
Siddha  ashrama,  I  have  now  accomplished  my  purpose. 

"  O  Rama,  at  thy  instance,  I  have  told  thee  of  my  family 
and  origin  ;  the  night  is  far  spent  in  listening  to  this  tele,  now 
rest,  so  that,  refreshed,  we  may  resume  our  journey  to-morrow. 
Peace  be  with  thee  I 

"  The  leaves  of  the  trees  are  motionless,  the  birds  and  beasts 
are  silent  and  darkness  covers  all.  How  imperceptibly  the 
evening  has  passed  away.  The  sky  is  brilliant  with  stars,  as  if 
a  thousand  eyes  gazed  down  on  us. 

"  The  bright  moon  with  its  cool  beams,  slowly  rising  higher 
and  higher  dispels  the  darkness.  Nocturnal  wanderers  and  the 
terrible  flesh-eating  yakshas  prowl  about  here  and  there." 

Having  uttered  these  words,  the  great  Sage  Vishwamitra 
became  silent.  The  other  munis  praised  him  saying :  "  Well 
spoken,  well  spoken,  O  Sage." 

They  said:  "The  dynasty  of  Kusha  has  ever  practised 
righteousness  and  the  kings  of  this  line  have  been  eminent  in 
virtue.  Of  this  dynasty,  thou,  O  Vishwamitra,  art  the  most 
illustrious,  the  fame  of  this  royal  line  has  been  enhanced  by 
the  beautiful  river  Kaushiki." 

Thus  did  the  great  sages  praise  the  Rishi  Vishwamitra,  who 
then  withdrew  to  rest,  as  the  sun  sets  behind  a  mountain. 

Shri  Ramachandra  and  his  brother  Lakshmana,  full  of  wonder 
also  made  obeisance  to  the  holy  sage  and  retired  to  sleep. 


BALA    KANDA 


CHAPTER    35 


Vishwamitra  begins  to  narrate  the  origin  of  the  holy 
river  Gunga 

Having  passed  the  night  with  the  other  munis  on  the  banks 
of  the  river  Shona,  Shri  Vishwamitra  said  to  Prince  Rama  at 
daybreak :  "Arise,  O  Prince,  the  day  has  dawned,  may  prosperity 
attend  thee  !  Perform  thy  morning  devotions  and  let  us  prepare 
for  our  journey." 

Shri  Rama  listened  to  the  instructions  of  the  holy  sage, 
recited  his  morning  prayers  and  prepared  to  leave,  saying: 
"  O  Knower  of  God,  the  waters  of  the  holy  river  Shona  appear 
to  be  very  shallow  and  rest  on  a  sandy  bed,  be  pleased  to  instruct 
us  where  we  should  cross  over  it." 

The  sage  replied :  "  O  Prince,  I  will  show  thee  where  the 
great  rishis  traversed  it."  Thereafter  they  forded  the  river 
and  journeyed  on  and  on,  enjoying  the  many  beautiful  woods 
and  forests  through  which  they  passed. 

After  proceeding  a  great  distance,  late  one  afternoon,  they 
reached  the  holy  river  Ganges,  beloved  of  the  sages.  On 
beholding  the  lovely  river  rendered  beautiful  by  the  presence 
of  swans  and  cranes,  Rama,  Lakshmana  and  the  sages  were 
filled  with  delight. 

They  halted  on  the  banks  and  bathed  in  the  sacred  river  as 
prescribed  by  the  holy  ordinance,  then  lighting  their  sacrificial 
fires  they  partook  of  the  remains  of  the  offerings.  According 
to  the  tradition,  they  offered  water  to  their  ancestors  and 
spreading  coverings,  seated  themselves  by  the  holy  Ganges. 

Sitting  in  the  midst  of  the  sages  with  the  two  princes  before 
him,  Shri  Vishwamitra  was  questioned  by  Shri  Rama  in  the 
following  manner : — 

"  O  Lord,  I  desire  to  hear  the  story  of  this  holy  river,  which 
traverses  the  three  paths.1  How  does  the  sacred  Gunga, 
passing  through  the  three  worlds  merge  at  last  in  the  ocean  ? " 

1  In  Hindu  mythology  the  universe  is  divided  into  the  three  worlds  :  Bhur, 
Bhuvah,  Swah,  the  lower,  middle  and  upper  worlds.  The  sacred  river  is  said 
to  traverse  all  three. 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 

On  this  request,  Shri  Vishwamitra  began  to  narrate  the  origin 
and  genesis  of  the  sacred  river. 

"  O  Rama,  the  great  Himavat,  Lord  of  the  Himalayas,  the 
treasury  of  all  precious  metals,  had  two  daughters,  who  were 
unsurpassed  in  loveliness  on  earth.  Their  mother  Mena,  the 
wife  of  Himachala  (Himavat)  was  the  daughter  of  Mount  Meru. 
Her  elder  daughter  was  named  Gunga  and  the  younger  Uma. 

"  The  devas  wishing  to  observe  certain  sacred  rites,  asked 
for  Shri  Gunga  to  promote  the  success  of  their  undertaking 
and  with  the  permission  of  her  father,  took  her  away  with  them. 

"  Himachala,  mindful  of  the  good  of  all  beings,  gave  his 
daughter  Gunga,  the  purifier  of  the  whole  world,  to  the  gods, 
thinking  it  to  be  his  duty  to  do  so.  The  gods  supremely 
gratified  took  bis  daughter  Gunga  and  blessing  all,  left 
Himachala. 

"  O  Prince  of  the  House  of  Raghu,  the  other  daughter  of 
Himachala,  named  Uma,  practised  great  asceticism,  considering 
it  to  be  her  chief  wealth.  Himachala  gave  this  ascetic  daughter 
Uma,  who  was  venerated  by  the  whole  world,  to  Shri  Mahadeva1 
in  marriage,  thinking  him  to  be  a  worthy  consort. 

"  O  Rama,  now  I  have  told  thee  of  the  two  daughters  of 
Himachala,  revered  by  the  whole  world,  the  river  Gunga  and 
Uma  Devi. 

"  O  my  Son,  O  Chief  of  Disciples,  I  have  related  to  thee 
the  story  of  Shri  Gunga  accompanying  the  devas  to  heaven. 
This  beautiful  daughter  of  the  King  of  Himalaya,  once  resident 
in  heaven,  is  the  charming  river  Gunga,  whose  waters  destroy 
all  sin." 


chapter   36 

The  story  of  the  king  of  Himalayas'  younger  daughter  Uma 

Hearing  the  wonderful  narrative,  so  eloquently  related  by  Shri 
Vishwamitra,  both  the  princes  praised  the  holy  sage  and  said  : 
"  O  Divine  Sage,  thou  hast  told  us  a  tale,  by  the  hearing  of 

1  Mahadeva— A  title  of  the  Lord  Shiva. 
74 


BALA    KANDA 

which  great  merit  is  acquired,  be  gracious  enough  to  enlighten 
us  further  regarding  the  elder  daughter  of  the  King  of  Himalaya. 
Thou  art  omniscient,  therefore  describe  to  us  fully,  how  the 
Gunga,  the  world  purifying  stream,  came  down  from  heaven 
to  earth.  O  Thou,  versed  in  the  science  of  dharma,  why  is 
this  sacred  river  called  Tripathaga  (the  Traverser  of  the  Three 
Worlds)  and  whence  is  this  name  derived  ?  " 

Seated  amidst  the  other  sages,  Shri  Vishwamitra,  whose  only 
wealth  was  truth  and  austerity,  spoke  as  follows,  in  answer  to 
Shri  Rama's  questioning : — 

"  O  Prince,  in  ancient  times,  the  holy  Lord  Mahadeva  was 
wedded  to  Parvati1  and  being  charmed  with  her  beauty  devoted 
himself  to  the  delights  of  connubial  bliss.  According  to  the 
measure  of  time  of  the  gods,  the  Lord  Mahadeva  passed  a 
hundred  years  with  that  devis  but  remained  without  issue.  In 
their  anxiety,  the  gods  approached  Shri  Brahma  and  said : — 

"  *  Who  will  be  able  to  endure  the  power  and  glory  of  the 
offspring  produced  by  these  two  mighty  beings  ?  ' 

"  They  then  took  refuge  with  Shri  Mahadeva,  saying :  *  O 
God  of  Gods,  O  Mahadeva,  ever  engaged  in  doing  good  to  all 
beings,  we  offer  salutations  to  thee,  be  gracious  unto  us  !  Thy 
power,  O  First  among  the  Gods,  none  can  endure,  therefore 
with  this  goddess  engage  in  yogic  penances.  For  the  welfare 
of  the  three  worlds,  retain  thine  energy  within  thy  body  so  that 
the  universe  may  be  preserved  and  may  not  suffer  destruction  V 

The  Ruler  of  the  World,  Shri  Mahadeva,  listened  to  the  words 
of  the  devas  and  said :  "  Be  it  so,  O  Devas,  I  will  restrain  my 
power  so  that  all  the  regions  including  the  earth  may  dwell 
in  peace,  but  O  Devas,  should  my  vital  fluid  overflow,  who 
shall  receive  it  ?  " 

The  gods  answered  Shri  Mahadeva,  saying :  "  Let  the  earth 
receive  it." 

Then  Shri  Mahadeva  let  fall  his  seed  on  the  earth  covering 
the  mountains,  seas  and  forests.  When  the  earth  could  bear 
no  more,  the  devas  asked  the  wind  and  Are  deities  to  combine 

1  Parvati — The  consort  of  the  Lord  Shiva. 

*  Devi— another  name  for  Parvati.  Devi  literaljy  means  goddess  or  shining 
one. 

75 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 

with  that  creative  power  and  thus  was  a  white  mountain  created 
and  later  a  heavenly  forest  as  resplendent  as  the  light  of  the  sun. 
From  this  fiery  light  was  born  the  glorious  Swami  Karttikeya.1 

"All  the  gods  and  rishis  were  full  of  joy  and  adored  the  Lord 
Shiva  and  the  goddess  Uma.  As  they  worshipped  them  with 
grateful  hearts,  Uma  was  filled  with  wrath  and  said :  *  O  Devas, 
your  action  has  filled  me  with  displeasure,  you  shall  not  escape 
the  consequences.* 

"  Then  Uma  shining  like  the  sun,  took  water  in  the  palm 
of  her  hand  and  pronounced  a  curse  on  the  gods,  saying  ;  '  O 
Devas,  you  have  prevented  me  from  bearing  a  son,  may  you 
be  childless  from  this  day,  may  your  wives  be  without  progeny.* 

"  Still  not  appeased,  Uma  cursed  the  earth  also  and  said : 
'  O  Earth,  thou  shalt  never  remain  in  one  form,  thou  shalt  have 
many  masters.  O  Witless  One,  thou  shalt  never  bear  a  son, 
since  thou  hast  prevented  me  from  becoming  a  mother.' 

"  Shri  Mahadeva,  seeing  the  devas  discomfited,  prepared  to 
depart  to  the  northern  region  of  the  Himalayas.  There,  on  a 
peak  named  Himavatprabhava,  he  engaged  in  prolonged  yogic 
practices  together  with  Uma. 

"  O  Rama,  I  have  told  thee  of  one  of  the  two  daughters  of 
the  Himalayas ;  now  with  Lakshmana,  listen  to  the  tale  of  the 
other  daughter  of  Himalaya,  named  Gunga." 


chapter   37 

The  king's  elder  daughter,  Gunga 

Whilst  Shri  Mahadeva  was  engaged  in  yogic  meditation,  the 
devas,  under  the  leadership  of  Agni,  went  to  the  region  of 
Brahma  where,  with  Indra,  they  paid  reverence  to  the  Lord 
of  the  world,  and  said :  "  O  Lord,  at  the  beginning  of  creation 
thou  did'st  make  Shri  Mahadeva  our  leader,  but  he  has  now 
retired  to  the  Himalayas  and  is  engaged  in  the  practice  of 
austerity  with  Uma.    O  Thou  who  art  desirous  of  the  good 

1  Karttikeya— The  God  of  War. 

76 


BALA    KANDA 

of  the  world,  do  what  thou  considerest  ought  to  be  done,  thou 
art  our  only  refuge." 

Then  Shri  Brahma  encouraged  the  devas,  with  gentle  words, 
saying :  "  O  Devas,  the  curse  of  Uma  Devi,  that  you  should 
remain  without  offspring  is  irrevocable,  but  the  fire  god  Agni 
will  cause  Gunga  to  bear  a  son  who  will  destroy  the  enemies 
of  the  gods.  The  youngest  daughter  of  Himanchala  (Uma) 
will  look  upon  her  sister's  son  as  her  own  and  will  inevitably 
lavish  her  affection  on  him." 

"  O  Rama,  the  words  of  Shri  Brahma  filled  the  gods  with 
satisfaction  and  they  offered  obeisance  to  him.  Then  they  all 
circumambulated  Mount  Kailasha,"  the  repository  of  precious 
metals,  and  begged  Agni  to  beget  a  son. 

"Agni  acquiesced  in  their  request  and  approaching  Shri 
Gunga,  said :  '  O  Devi,  let  us  beget  a  son  for  it  is  the  wish 
of  the  gods.' 

"Assuming  the  form  of  a  celestial  nymph,  Gunga,  inspired 
the  fire  god  to  plant  his  seed  in  her,  her  every  vein  being  filled 
with  splendour.  After  a  time,  she  addressed  Agni,  saying: 
'  O  Deva,  I  am  unable  to  bear  the  ever-increasing  splendour 
which  thou  hast  communicated  to  me.  My  body  is  burning 
like  fire,  my  mind  is  agitated  and  I  am  filled  with  fear.' 

"Agni  replied :  *  O  Sinless  One,  place  this  foetus  near  the 
Himalayas.' 

"  Then  Gunga  Devi  expelled  the  resplendent  being,  shining 
like  gold.  This  substance,  falling  on  the  earth,  became  the 
purest  gold  that  can  be  found.  All  objects  in  its  proximity 
became  silver  and  the  more  distant  areas  exposed  to  its 
penetrating  rays  became  copper,  the  baser  parts  becoming  zinc 
and  lead.  In  this  way,  its  brilliance  was  transmuted  into  metals 
and  spread  abroad  and  the  mountains  and  forests  near  by  were 
changed  to  gold.  O  Rama,  gold  being  produced  in  that  dazzling 
form  is  called  jatarupa  (form-born)  and,  O  Hero,  that  is  why 
gold  shines  like  fire.  The  grass,  the  creepers,  the  shrubs,  all 
were  converted  into  gold,  and  from  that  splendour  was  born 
Kumara. 

"  The  devas  with  Indra  engaged  the  Krittikas1  to  nurse  the 

1  Mount  Kailasha — said  to  be  the  abode  of  Lord  Shiva. 
■  Krittikas — The  Pleiades,  the  six  nurses  of  the  God  of  War. 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 

child  and  they  regarded  him  as  their  own  son.  The  gods  named 
the  child  Karttikeya  and  said :  *  He  shall  be  our  son  and  he 
will  be  renowned  in  the  three  worlds.* 

"  The  Krittikas  bathed  the  child  and  as  he  grew,  his  form 
resembled  the  fire.  Because  the  infant  was  born  prematurely, 
the  devas  called  him  Skanda. 

"  The  nurses  began  to  nourish  the  child  with  milk  and  he 
shone  like  a  flame.  With  six  mouths  he  sucked  the  milk  of 
six  nurses  at  the  same  time.  Soon  he  grew  so  powerful  that 
while  yet  an  infant  he  challenged  groups  of  demons  to  combat. 
Then  all  the  gods  appointed  him  their  commander-in-chief. 
The  Devas  and  Agni  paid  affectionate  homage  to  this  child. 

"  O  Rama,  this  is  the  inspiring  and  merit-bestowing  story 
of  Shri  Gunga  and  Karttikeya. 

"  O  Raghava,  on  this  earth,  those  who  read  this  narrative 
with  faith  and  devotion  shall  have  long  lives,  sons  and  grandsons 
and  obtain  the  divine  region  of  Skanda." 


CHAPTER    38 

The  story  of  King  Sagara,  Shri  Rama's  ancestor 

Shri  Vishwamitra  in  gentle  accents,  related  this  story  to  Shri 
Ramachandra,  and  then  again  addressed  him,  saying  : — 

"  In  ancient  times  there  lived  a  king  named  Sagara,  who 
ruled  in  Ayodhya.  He  was  brave  and  virtuous  and  a  lover 
of  his  subjects,  yet  he  was  without  issue. 

"  The  name  of  his  chief  queen  was  Keshini,  a  daughter  of 
King  Vidharba ;  she  was  virtuous  and  truthful.  His  second 
queen  was  Sumati,  a  daughter  of  Arishtanemi  and  she  was 
comely  and  charming. 

"  The  king  went  to  the  Himalayas  and  engaged  in  severe 

yogic  practices  in  the  forest  of  Bhrigu-prasravana.    When  he 

had  completed  a  hundred  years'  ascetic  practices,  the  ever 

truthful  Maharishi  Bhrigu  was  pleased  with  him  and  favoured 

78 


BALA    KANDA 

him  with  a  boon.  He  said :  '  O  Sinless  King,  thou  shah  beget 
many  sons  and  thy  fame  will  be  immeasurable.  From  one  of 
thy  queens  shall  be  born  one  son,  and  from  the  other  sixty 
thousand  sons.1 

"  When  the  queens  heard  of  the  boon  granted  by  the  rishi, 
they  approached  him  saying :  '  O  Knower  of  God,  we  are 
certain  that  thy  boon  will  bear  fruit,  please  tell  us  therefore 
which  of  us  will  beget  one  son  and  which  sixty  thousand  ?  ' 

"Hearing  their  words,  the  highly  virtuous  Bhrigu  said: 
*  That  depends  on  your  desires.  Tell  me,  which  of  you  would 
fain  be  the  mother  of  the  founder  of  the  dynasty  and  which 
desires  to  beget  sixty  thousand  illustrious  sons  ? ' 

"  O  Rama,  Queen  Keshini  desired  to  be  favoured  by  one  son 
only,  but  Sumati,  the  sister  of  Garuda1  obtained  the  boon  of 
bearing  sixty  thousand  powerful  and  illustrious  sons. 

"  O  Prince,  the  king  offered  salutations  to  the  Rishi  Bhrigu 
and  with  his  consorts  returned  to  the  capital. 

"  When  the  time  was  ripe,  the  chief  Queen  Keshini  gave  birth 
to  a  son  who  was  called  Asamanjasa. 

"  O  Great  One,  a  gourd  was  brought  forth  by  Queen  Sumati 
from  which,  when  opened,  sixty  thousand  male  infants  emerged. 
The  nurses  placed  them  in  jars  full  of  butter  and  tended  them. 
After  a  long  time  they  attained  to  the  state  of  adolescence, 
and  then  grew  to  manhood. 

"  O  Rama,  the  eldest  son  of  King  Sagara,  Asamanjasa  used 
to  seize  hold  of  children  and  throw  them  into  the  river  Sarayu. 
When  he  saw  them  drowning,  he  rejoiced.  This  evil  doer 
grew  up  to  oppress  the  good  by  his  conduct. 

"The  citizens  of  King  Sagara's  capital  exiled  the  prince, 
thus  passing  judgment  on  him.  Asamanjasa  became  the  father 
of  a  valiant  prince  named  Anshuman,  who  was  esteemed  by 
everyone  and  addressed  every  man  with  courtesy. 

"After  a  long  time,  King  Sagara  resolved  to  perform  a 
sacrifice.  O  Rama,  the  king  summoning  the  high  priests  began 
the  initiatory  rites." 


1  Garuda — a  mythological  bird,  half  man,  half  bird,  the  vehicle  of  Shri  Vishnu, 
and  the  slayer  of  serpents.  Garuda  is  said  to  have  stolen  the  nectar  of  immortality 
from  the  gods,  when  it  was  churned  from  the  ocean. 


79  <* 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 

CHAPTER    39 

The  korse  with  which  he  performs  a  sacrifice  is  stolen 

Having  listened  to  this  tale,  Shri  Rama  addressed  the  Muni 
Vishwamitra,  who  resembled  the  fire  in  splendour,  and  said : 
"  O  Wise  One,  may  prosperity  constantly  attend  thee !  I  desire 
to  hear  how  my  ancestor  King  Sagara  performed  the 
sacrifice." 

Shri  Vishwamitra,  highly  gratified  by  Shri  Rama's  eager 
enquiry,  smilingly  replied :  "  Listen,  0  Rama,  to  the  history 
of  the  high-soul ed  King  Sagara.  There  is  a  country  between 
the  Himalayas  and  the  Vindhya  mountains,  and  it  was  there 
that  King  Sagara  performed  his  sacrifice.  That  land  is  suitable 
for  this  purpose,  O  Great  Prince. 

"  The  great  archer  and  warrior  Anshuman  was  appointed  the 
protector  of  the  horse  released  for  the  sacrifice.  A  rakshasa 
in  disguise,  stole  the  horse  and  when  it  was  being  borne  away, 
the  priests  approached  the  king,  crying :  '  See,  someone  is 
carrying  off  the  horse,  kill  the  thief  and  restore  it.'  The  king 
called  for  his  sixty  thousand  sons  and  said  :  'A  wicked  demon 
has  stolen  the  sacrificial  steed,  in  what  direction  has  he  borne 
it  away?  It  has  been  consecrated  by  mantrams  to  avoid 
obstructions ;  seek  the  horse,  my  sons,  and  may  success  attend 
you.  Scour  the  earth  surrounded  by  the  seas,  and  excavate 
the  earth  at  my  command,  till  the  sacred  horse  is  found. 
Having  taken  the  initiation,  I  cannot  leave  this  place.  Go  Ye, 
My  Sons !  I  shall  remain  here  with  Anshuman  and  the  brahmins.' 

"  O  Rama,  commanded  by  their  father,  those  powerful  princes 
joyfully  started  in  search  of  the  horse.  O  Great  One !  they 
ranged  the  world  in  vain  and  began  to  dig  the  ground  with 
their  nails  which  were  as  sharp  as  diamonds. 

"  O  Prince  of  the  House  of  Raghu,  they  used  ploughs,  spades 
and  other  implements  to  excavate  the  ground  and  the  earth 
shook  with  the  sound.  While  ploughing  up  the  earth,  many 
snakes,  demons  and  powerful  titans  were  slain  and  injured. 

"  O  Raghava,  those  mighty  princes  pierced  the  earth  to  the 
depth  of  sixty  thousand  miles  and  reached  the  antipodes.  Having 
80 


BALA    KANDA 

pierced  the  earth  with  its  mountains,  they  searched  for  the  horse 
in  Jambudwipa.1 

"  The  devasj  gandharvas,  asuras  and  nagas  became  agitated, 
and  approached  Shri  Brahma ;  bowing  before  him  with  their 
minds  afflicted  and  in  great  distress,  they  said :  *  O  Blessed 
Lord,  the  sons  of  the  Maharajah  Sagara  are  digging  up  the 
whole  earth  and  they  have  brought  about  the  death  of  many 
great  beings.  Whosoever  opposes  them  is  slain  with  the  words, 
"  Thou  art  a  thief,  thou  hast  stolen  the  sacrificial  horse  "  V 


chapter  40 

The  king's  sons  search  for  the  horse  ;  they  accuse  Shri  Kapila 
of  stealing  it  and  are  reduced  to  ashes 

"  The  grandsire  Shri  Brahma,  hearing  the  words  of  the  gods 
regarding  the  sons  of  Ring  Sagara,  who  were  already  doomed, 
said: — 

"  *  O  Devas,  this  whole  world  belongs  to  the  glorious  Vasu- 
deva2  and  he,  in  the  form  of  the  Sage  Kapila,  supports  it. 
These  princes  will  fall  victims  to  the  wrath  of  holy  Kapila ; 
the  earth  is  eternal  and  cannot  be  destroyed.'  The  gods, 
hearing  these  words,  returned  to  their  own  regions,  full  of  joy. 

"  Meanwhile,  the  uproar  caused  by  the  sons  of  Sagara  digging 
the  earth  resembled  the  crash  of  thunder. 

"  Having  encompassed  the  whole  world,  they  returned  to 
their  father  and  said :  '  We  have  traversed  the  whole  world 
and  have  slain  gods,  demons  and  snakes,  but  we  have  found 
no  trace  of  the  sacrificial  horse  nor  of  the  thief.  O  Father, 
may  prosperity  attend  thee,  be  pleased  to  reflect  on  the  matter 
and  give  us  further  instructions.' 

"  The  great  monarch  replied  in  anger :  *  Go,  dig  the  earth 
once  more,  capture  the  horse,  accomplish  your  purpose,  then 
return.' 

Jambi 

Vasudcva-^-a  name  of  Vishnu. 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 

"  In  accordance  with  the  command  of  their  royal  sire,  the 
princes  once  more  renewed  their  tunnelling  and  came  upon 
the  monstrous  form  of  a  great  elephant  which  resembled  a 
mountain. 

"  O  Prince  of  Raghu,  the  whole  earth  and  the  mountains 
of  that  quarter  are  supported  by  that  elephant  Vimpaksha,  and 
whenever,  from  fatigue,  he  moves  his  feet  to  ease  himself, 
the  whole  world  trembles  and  quakes. 

"  The  princes  bowed  down  to  him  and  circumambulated  him. 
They  then  continued  digging  deeper  and  deeper,  first  to  the 
east,  then  to  the  west.  To  the  south  they  saw  the  second 
great  elephant  whose  name  was  Mahapadma.  They  beheld  him 
supporting  that  quarter  of  the  earth  and  were  astonished ; 
they  offered  him  salutations. 

"  O  Prince,  the  sons  of  King  Sagara  next  dug  the  northern 
quarter  of  the  earth  and  saw  there  a  white  elephant  which 
resembled  a  heap  of  snow.  His  name  was  Hima-Pandara  and 
his  form  was  gigantic;  they  worshipped  him  as  he  stood 
supporting  that  quarter  of  the  earth. 

"  Then  with  furious  zeal,  those  mighty  and  valiant  sons  of 
Sagara  dug  the  earth  and  proceeded  to  that  renowned  quarter 
where  they  saw  Kapila  the  eternal  Lord  Vasudeva  and  the  horse 
grazing  near  him. 

"  O  Rama,  they  were  glad,  thinking  that  it  was  Shri  Kapila 
who  had  stolen  the  horse.  Full  of  wrath,  seizing  ploughs,  trees, 
rocks  and  stones,  they  ran  towards  him,  crying :  *  Thou  art 
the  stealer  of  the  sacrificial  horse,  thou  art  the  thief.  O  Wicked 
One,  we,  the  sons  of  King  Sagara,  have  found  thee.' 

"  O  Rama,  Shri  Kapila,  hearing  these  words,  filled  with  rage, 
uttered  the  sound  '  H*m '  and  instantly  by  his  immeasurable 
power  all  the  sons  of  Sagara  were  reduced  to  ashes." 


BALA    KANDA 

CHAPTER    4  I 

King  Sagara's  grandson,  Anshuman,  finds  the  horse  and  the 

ashes  of  his  uncles.    He  is  told  the  funeral  rites  must  be 

performed  with  the  waters  of  the  holy  river  Gunga 

"  O  Ramachakdra,  perceiving  that  a  long  period  had  elapsed 
since  the  departure  of  his  sons,  King  Sagara  spoke  to  his 
powerful  and  resplendent  grandson  Anshuman  : 

"  *  O  Child,  thou  art  valiant,  learned  and  illustrious  like  thine 
ancestors,  go  and  seek  thine  uncles  and  the  stealer  of  the  horse 
also.  The  interior  of  the  earth  is  inhabited  by  the  most  mighty 
beings,  arm  thyself  therefore  with  sword,  bow  and  arrows.  Pay 
reverence  to  those  worthy  to  be  worshipped  whom  thou  dost 
encounter  on  the  way  and  make  obeisance  to  them ;  slay  those 
who  obstruct  thy  purpose,  then  successful,  return  and  ensure 
the  completion  of  the  sacrifice.' 

"  Thus  instructed  by  his  grandfather,  Prince  Anshuman, 
arming  himself  with  sword,  bow  and  arrows,  speedily  departed. 
Honoured  on  the  way  by  devas,  danavas,  asuras  and  nagas, 
pisachas,  birds  and  serpents,  he  came  to  the  mighty  and 
resplendent  elephant  and  worshipped  him,  enquiring  as  to  his 
welfare.  The  elephant  said  in  reply :  f  O  Prince  Anshuman, 
thou  wilt  accomplish  thy  purpose  and  soon  return  to  the  capital.' 

"  The  prince  proceeded  further  and  enquired  in  the  same 
manner  of  each  of  the  other  great  elephants.  They  all  advised 
the  prince,  who  had  paid  due  respect  to  them,  to  proceed  further. 
As  instructed  by  them,  Anshuman  came  to  the  place  where 
the  heaped  ashes  of  his  uncles*  bodies  were  lying.  Overcome 
with  grief,  Anshuman  wept  to  see  that  death  had  overtaken 
them.  Afflicted  with  distress  and  pain,  he  suddenly  perceived 
the  sacrificial  horse  grazing  near  by.  Desirous  of  offering  the 
rite  of  water  for  his  departed  relatives,  he  looked  round  but 
could  find  no  water  anywhere.  Extending  his  gaze,  he  saw 
his  maternal  uncle,  the  holy  eagle,  who  addressed  the  prince 
as  follows : — 

" '  O  Lion  among  men,  grieve  not,  these  princes  have  met 
the  death  they  deserved.    They  have  been  consumed  to  ashes 
83 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 

by  the  Mahatma  Kapila  of  unimaginable  glory.  O  Wise  One, 
it  is  not  meet  to  offer  the  usual  rites  for  them.  O  Great  One, 
perform  the  rites  with  the  water  of  the  holy  river  Gunga,  the 
Daughter  of  Himalaya.  When  the  waters  of  the  purifier  of 
the  world,  the  sacred  Gunga  flow  over  their  ashes,  the  ceremony 
will  be  crowned  with  success  and  the  sixty  thousand  princes 
will  be  received  into  heaven  \" 

The  illustrious  and  mighty  Prince  Anshuman  listened  to  the 
words  of  Shri  Garuda  and  speedily  returning  with  the  horse, 
approached  King  Sagara,  who  still  awaited  the  completion  of 
the  initiatory  rites ;  he  related  to  him  all  that  the  eagle  had 
said.  The  monarch  completed  the  sacrifice  and  returned  to 
his  capital  considering  the  means  whereby  he  might  cause  Shri 
Gunga  to  descend  to  earth ;  but  in  vain. 

King  Sagara,  unable  to  devise  any  way  to  accomplish  this 
matter,  having  ruled  for  thirty  thousand  years,  departed  hence. 


chapter   42 

Anshuman* s  son,  Dilipa,  fails  and  his  son  Bhagiratha  performs 
austerities  to  induce  the  holy  river  to  descend 

After  his  death,  the  ministers  installed  the  virtuous  Anshuman 
as  king.  O  Rama,  glorious  was  the  reign  of  King  Anshuman. 
He  was  succeeded  by  his  son,  the  world-renowned  Dilipa. 

King  Anshuman,  leaving  his  kingdom  to  Dilipa,  retired  to 
the  top  of  a  Himalayan  peak  and  began  to  perform  severe  yogic 
austerities.  Having  passed  thirty-two  thousand  years  in  this 
wise,  without  inducing  the  sacred  river  Gunga  to  descend  on 
earth,  he  gave  up  his  life. 

Acquainted  with  the  fate  of  his  great  uncles,  and  overcome 
with  grief,  the  mighty  sovereign  Dilipa  found  no  means  of 
bringing  the  sacred  stream  down  to  earth.  Consumed  with 
anxiety,  he  reflected  daily  on  how  he  should  accomplish  the 
descent  of  the  Gunga  and  perform  the  funeral  rites  for  the 
deliverance  of  the  souls  of  his  ancestors.    The  righteous  and 


BALA    KANDA 

illustrious  King  Dilipa,  constantly  engaged  in  these  reflections, 
was  then  blessed  with  the  birth  of  a  virtuous  son, 
Bhagiratha. 

The  renowned  monarch  Dilipa  observing  many  sacrifices, 
ruled  over  his  kingdom  for  thirty  thousand  years ;  his  thoughts 
were  ever  devoted  to  the  deliverance  of  the  souls  of  his  forbears 
until  stricken  with  disease,  he  was  claimed  by  death.  Having 
bequeathed  the  kingdom  to  his  son  Bhagiratha,  his  spirit 
ascended  to  the  region  of  Indra. 

O  Rama,  Bhagiratha  was  a  virtuous  and  royal  sage,  but  he 
had  no  heir  and  was  desirous  of  obtaining  a  son.  O  Raghava, 
he  entrusted  the  administration  of  his  kingdom  to  his  ministers 
and  proceeded  to  the  holy  place  named  Gokarna  where  he 
practised  yogic  penances  to  attract  the  descent  of  the  holy  Gunga. 
With  arms  uplifted  and  senses  controlled,  he  stood  in  the  midst 
of  five  fires  in  the  hottest  season,  partaking  of  food  once  a  month 
only,  and  continued  thus  for  a  thousand  years. 

O  Mighty  Prince,  after  a  thousand  years,  Shri  Brahma,  the 
Lord  and  Ruler  of  the  world,  was  pleased  with  Bhagiratha  and, 
accompanied  by  the  devas,  approached  the  high-souled  king 
and  said ; 

"  O  Bhagiratha,  thy  virtuous  yogic  practices  have  elicited  our 
admiration  ;  ask  for  a  boon,  O  Fortunate  One." 

The  highly  resplendent  Bhagiratha,  with  joined  palms 
submissively  addressed  Shri  Brahma,  saying :  "  O  Blessed  Lord, 
if  thou  art  pleased  to  confer  the  fruits  of  mine  austerities  on  me 
and  grant  me  a  boon,  then  allow  me  to  deliver  the  souls  of 
the  sons  of  King  Sagara  by  offering  them  water  at  their  funeral 
rites,  from  the  sacred  stream.  O  Lord,  do  thou  also  grant  as 
a  further  boon  that  the  Dynasty  of  Ikshwaku  may  be  preserved 
and  I  may  have  an  heir." 

The  Grandsire  of  the  whole  world  listened  to  the  prayer  of 
the  Maharajah  Bhagiratha  and  answered  him  in  gentle  and 
pleasing  accents : — 

"  0  Mighty  King  Bhagiratha,  thou  hast  asked  a  great  boon, 

may  success  attend  thee  !    Let  thy  desire  for  a  son  be  fulfilled. 

0  King,  when  the  Gunga,  the  eldest  daughter  of  Himalaya  falls 

on  the  earth  with  overwhelming  power,  the  earth  will  not  be 

85 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 

able  to  sustain  her ;  none  but  the  Lord  Shiva  can  accomplish 
this." 

Having  uttered  these  words  to  King  Bhagiratha  and  having 
spoken  to  Shri  Gunga  also,  Shri  Brahma  returned  with  the  gods 
to  his  own  region. 


chapter   43 

Lord  Shiva  lets  loose  the  sacred  river  which  follows 
King  Bhagiratka's  celestial  chariot 

Shri  Brahma  having  departed,  the  King  Bhagiratha,  standing 
on  the  tip  of  one  toe,  adored  Shri  Shiva  for  a  full  year.  O 
Mighty  One,  with  arms  uplifted,  living  on  air,  unsupported, 
fixed  like  a  pillar,  day  and  night  King  Bhagiratha  offered  his 
adorations  to  the  Lord. 

A  full  year  having  passed,  the  Lord  of  Uma,  Shri  Mahadeva, 
who  is  adored  by  the  whole  world,  spoke  to  King  Bhagiratha 
as  follows :  "  O  Great  One,  I  am  pleased  with  thee,  I  will 
accomplish  what  thou  desirest,  I  will  receive  the  descent  of 
Gunga  on  my  head." 

Then  the  holy  Gunga,  the  eldest  daughter  of  Himalaya,  the 
object  of  reverence  to  the  whole  world,  assuming  the  form  of 
a  mighty  river,  descended  with  torrential  force  on  to  the  head 
of  Shiva.  The  goddess  reflected  within  herself  that  she  would 
bear  down  the  Lord  Mahadeva  to  the  antipodes.  Shri  Shiva, 
reading  her  thoughts,  grew  angry  and  determined  to  detain  the 
mighty  stream  in  his  hair.  Resembling  the  majestic  Himalayas, 
the  locks  of  Shri  Shiva  held  the  falling  Gunga  fast  and  the 
sacred  river  remained  imprisoned  there.  For  innumerable  years 
the  Gunga  wandered  round  and  round  in  the  locks  of  Shri 
Mahadeva  and  could  not  find  an  egress. 

O  Rama,  when  Shri  Bhagiratha  did  not  see  the  holy  stream 
descending  to  earth,  he  again  began  his  penance  in  order  to 
propitiate  the  Lord  of  the  world. 

Then  Shri  Shiva  let  loose  the  Gunga  in  the  Brindusara  lake 
86 


BALA    KANDA 

and  as  it  fell  it  divided  itself  into  seven  streams.  The  three 
branches  conferring  prosperity,  Hladini,  Pavani  and  Halini, 
flowed  towards  the  east  from  the  head  of  holy  Shiva. 

Then  the  sacred  Gunga  of  pure  and  delightful  water  was 
divided  into  three  further  branches,  Suchakshu,  Sita  and 
Sindhav>  all  flowing  towards  the  west.  The  seventh  of  these 
streams  followed  the  chariot  of  the  Maharajah  Bhagiratha. 

The  royal  sage,  riding  in  a  beautiful  chariot,  went  forward 
and  the  sacred  river  Gunga  followed  him. 

Thus  did  the  holy  river  descend  from  heaven  on  to  the 
forehead  of  Shri  Mahadeva  and  from  thence  came  to  the  surface 
of  the  earth. 

The  fall  of  the  sacred  stream  created  a  mighty  reverberation, 
her  waters  flowing  through  beautiful  ways.  Riding  their  aerial 
chariots  as  large  as  cities,  containing  elephants  and  horses,  the 
gods,  sages,  celestial  musicians,  yakshas  and  siddhas  in  great 
numbers,  came  to  witness  the  holy  Ganges  falling  from  heaven 
to  earth.  In  their  aerial  chariots  named  Pariplava,  the  gods 
came  to  see  this  wonderful  event  of  the  holy  river  flowing  on 
the  earth,  and  as  they  descended  from  the  skies,  the  splendour 
of  their  celestial  ornaments  irradiated  the  cloudless  canopy  of 
heaven  as  if  a  thousand  suns  had  risen  there. 

The  mercurial  fishes  and  aquatic  creatures  leaping  from  the 
stream  thrown  up  by  the  force  of  the  current,  shone  like  lightning 
in  the  sky,  whilst  the  foam  and  spray  scattered  on  all  sides 
resembled  flocks  of  swans  in  flight  or  clouds  in  winter. 

The  waters  of  the  holy  Gunga  sometimes  rose  high  in  the  air, 
sometimes  flowed  tortuously,  sometimes  broadened  out,  some- 
times dashed  against  the  rocks  and  sometimes  spouted  upwards 
afterwards  falling  to  the  ground ;  that  pure  water  capable  of 
removing  sin  looked  delightful  flowing  on  the  surface  of  the  earth. 

Then  the  celestial  sages  and  heavenly  musicians  and  the 
denizens  of  the  earth,  reverently  touched  that  sacred  stream 
falling  from  the  locks  of  Shiva. 

Those  beings,  who  through  a  curse,  had  fallen  from  the 
heavenly  regions  and  been  made  to  dwell  on  earth,  were  cleansed 
of  their  transgressions  by  bathing  in  the  holy  Gunga.  Purified 
and  freed  from  their  sins,  those  resplendent  beings  returned  to 
the  heavenly  regions,  passing  through  the  sky. 
87 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 

Wherever  the  sacred  Ganges  flowed,  people  were  cleansed 
of  their  sins  by  bathing  in  its  waters. 

King  Bhagiratha,  riding  a  celestial  chariot,  drove  on  and 
Shri  Gunga  followed  after  him. 

O  Rama,  the  gods,  the  sages,  rakshasas,  asuras,  yakshas, 
the  chief  serpents  and  nymphs  following  King  Bhagiratha, 
together  with  the  aquatic  beings  and  swans,  attended  the 
sacred  river.  Whichever  course  King  Bhagiratha  took,  that 
mighty  river  Gunga,  the  Destroyer  of  all  sin,  followed.  Flowing 
on  and  on,  Shri  Gunga  arrived  where  the  Sage  Jahnu,  worker 
of  miracles,  was  performing  a  sacrifice.  Then  the  sacred 
river  swept  over  the  sacrificial  pavilion  and  all  it  contained. 
The  Rishi  Jahnu  perceiving  the  pride  of  Gungaji,  grew  angry 
and  drank  up  the  whole  of  the  water  of  that  river,  verily  a  great 
miracle! 

The  devas,  gandharvas  and  sages  were  astonished  and  began 
to  worship  that  Mahatma  Jahnu,  saying,  "  From  to-day  the 
holy  river  shall  be  called  thy  daughter  ".  The  mighty  Jahnu 
being  pleased,  let  loose  the  river  through  his  ears.  From  thence 
Shri  Gunga  is  called  Jahnavi  (the  daughter  of  Jahnu).  Thereafter 
she  once  again  flowed  behind  the  chariot  of  King  Bhagiratha. 
Finally,  the  holy  Gunga  reached  the  sea  and  entered  the  lower 
regions  to  fulfil  the  purpose  of  the  king. 

The  royal  Sage  Bhagiratha  attended  by  the  sacred  river, 
gazed  with  grief  on  the  ashes  of  his  ancestors.  O  Prince  of 
the  House  of  Raghu,  as  soon  as  the  holy  stream  touched  the 
ashes,  the  sons  of  King  Sagara  were  resuscitated,  freed  from  sin, 
and  attained  the  celestial  region. 


chapter   44 

King  Bhagiratha  completes  the  funeral  rites  for  his  ancestors 

When  the  king  attended  by  the  holy  Gunga,  reached  the 
seashore,  he  entered  the  subterranean  region  where  the  sons 
of  King  Sagara  had  been  burnt  to  ashes. 


BALA    KANDA 

"  O  Rama,  as  the  holy  water  flowed  over  the  ashes,  Shri 
Brahma  the  Lord  of  all  the  worlds,  addressed  King  Bhagiratha 
as  follows :  '  O  Great  King,  thou  hast  redeemed  the  sixty 
thousand  sons  of  King  Sagara,  who  now  dwell  in  the  heavenly 
region.  O  King,  as  long  as  the  waters  of  the  sea  continue 
on  earth,  so  long  shall  the  sons  of  King  Sagara  in  celestial  form 
enjoy  heaven.  Henceforth,  O  Great  Sovereign,  Shri  Gunga 
shall  be  thy  eldest  daughter  and  be  known  by  thy  name 
throughout  the  earth.  This  sacred  river  shall  be  named  Shri 
Gunga,  Tripathaga1  and  Bhagirathi. 

" '  O  King,  perform  the  funeral  rites  of  thine  ancestors  and 
fulfil  thy  prescribed  duty.  The  mighty  King  Sagara  was  not 
able  to  accomplish  this  purpose  and  King  Anshuman  of  limitless 
prowess  also  failed  to  obtain  the  fulfilment  of  his  devout  desire. 
Thy  father  Dilipa,  equal  to  ourselves  in  merit  and  a  warrior 
fully  established  in  the  duties  of  his  caste,  that  illustrious  DUipa 
besought  the  holy  Gunga  to  descend  to  earth  in  vain.  This 
great  design  has  been  accomplished  by  thee  alone.  Thou  hast 
acquired  undying  renown  throughout  the  world. 

"  '  By  achieving  this,  thou  art  possessed  of  the  highest  dharma. 
O  Great  Sovereign,  now  do  thou  bathe  in  the  holy  stream  also. 
O  Lion  among  men,  purify  thyself  and  acquire  merit,  then 
perform  the  funeral  rites  of  thine  ancestors.  O  King,  may 
prosperity  attend  thee,  return  to  thy  capital,  I  shall  now  ascend 
to  my  own  abode.* 

"  The  mighty  and  illustrious  Brahma  then  ascended  to  heaven 
and  the  royal  Sage  Bhagiratha,  having  performed  the  obsequies 
of  the  sons  of  King  Sagara,  with  the  water  of  the  sacred  Ganges, 
returned  to  his  capital. 

"  Enjoying  every  felicity,  King  Bhagiratha  began  to  govern 
once  more  and  his  people  rejoiced  that  he  had  again  assumed 
rulership.  All  were  freed  from  suffering  and  anxiety  and  they 
increased  in  wealth  and  prosperity. 

"  O  Rama,  I  have  narrated  the  story  of  the  descent  of  Shri 
Gunga  fully  to  thee.  May  prosperity  attend  thee  1  Dusk  has 
fallen  and  the  hour  of  the  evening  prayer  has  come.  This  story 
gives  wealth,  prosperity,  fame,  longevity,  sons,  and  residence 

1  Tripathaga — three  way  going. 

89 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALM1KI 

in  heaven  to  the  reader.  He  who  causes  it  to  be  heard  by  others 
whether  he  be  a  brahmin  or  a  kshatriya,  brings  joy  to  his 
ancestors  and  the  gods. 

"  O  Ramachandra,  he  who  with  fixed  attention  listens  to  this 
story,  shall  obtain  all  he  desires,  his  sins  will  be  remitted 
and  he  will  obtain  long  life  and  renown." 


chapter   45 

Vishwamitra  begins  to  relate  the  story  of  the  city  of 
Vishala  and  the  churning  of  the  ocean,  which  leads 
to  the  combat  between  the  devas  and  the  dotty  as 

Shri  Ramachandra  and  Shri  Lakshmana  were  filled  with 
astonishment  on  hearing  the  words  of  Shri  Vishwamitra,  and 
said  to  him :  "  O  Holy  Sage,  marvellous  indeed  is  the  history 
of  King  Sagara  and  the  descent  of  the  Ganges,  which  thou  hast 
related  to  us." 

The  night  drew  on  as  they  had  been  listening  to  the  story, 
and  Shri  Rama  and  Lakshmana  passed  the  remaining  hours 
meditating  on  the  matter. 

The  clear  day  dawned  and  Shri  Rama,  having  performed 
his  daily  devotions,  said  to  Shri  Vishwamitra :  "  The  night 
has  passed  in  listening  to  this  divine  narrative,  it  has  slipped 
away,  as  if  it  were  a  moment.  Now  let  us  cross  the  sacred 
and  merit-giving  stream  reflecting  on  its  marvellous  origin. 
Knowing  thee  to  have  come,  the  other  sages  have  sent  a  boat 
in  preparation  for  crossing  the  holy  river." 

Shri  Vishwamitra  summoned  the  ferryman  and  with  the 
princes  and  sages  all  were  conveyed  to  the  other  side.  They 
rested  awhile  on  the  opposite  bank  and  entertained  the  sages 
in  their  company.  In  the  distance,  they  saw  the  city  named 
Vishala  and  soon  the  great  Rishi  Vishwamitra  with  the  princes 
reached  that  place  of  beauty,  which  resembled  one  of  Indra's 
cities. 

Then  Rama,  full  of  wisdom,  approached  the  holy  sage  and 
90 


BALA    KANDA 

humbly  made  enquiry  concerning  the  city.  He  said:  "O 
Great  Sage,  what  royal  and  illustrious  house  rules  here  ?  I 
desire  to  hear." 

At  these  words  of  Rama,  the  holy  sage  began  to  relate  the 
story  of  the  city  as  follows : — 

"  O  Rama,  attend !  I  will  tell  thee  the  story  of  this  city, 
which  I  heard  from  Indra. 

*'  In  the  golden  age  (Satya  Yuga)  Diti1  gave  birth  to  a  powerful 
son  Daitya,  an  asura,  and  Aditi1  gave  birth  to  the  highly 
fortunate  and  exceedingly  righteous  son  Devata,  a  celestial 
being.  These  two  sagacious  beings  sought  to  become  immortal, 
incorruptible  and  free  from  disease,  old  age  and  other  ills. 
After  reflecting  on  this  matter,  they  resolved  to  churn  Kshiroda 
(the  ocean  of  milk)  and  obtain  from  it  the  water  of  immortality. 
Using  the  mighty  snake  Vasuki  as  a  rope  and  the  Mandara 
mountain  as  the  churn,  they  began  to  churn  the  ocean.  When 
they  had  done  so  for  a  thousand  years,  the  snake  Vasuki  bit 
the  rocks  with  its  teeth  and  threw  up  venom.  From  this  was 
produced  the  great  poison  which  began  to  consume  men,  gods, 
demons  and  the  whole  world. 

"  The  gods  took  refuge  with  the  Lord  Shiva  and  worshipped 
him  crying  *  Protect  us,  protect  us  \  Attracted  by  the  mournful 
cry  of  the  gods,  Shri  Mahadeva  and  Shri  Hari3  appeared  there 
with  conch  and  disc. 

"  Shri  Vishnu3  smilingly  addressed  the  bearer  of  the  trident, 
Shri  Mahadeva,  and  said :  '  O  Lord,  thou  art  the  chief  of  the 
gods  and  should'st,  therefore,  accept  whatever  is  first  produced 
by  the  churning  of  the  ocean.  Receive  the  poison  as  thy  gift, 
the  first  tribute/ 

"Having  spoken  thus,  Shri  Vishnu  disappeared,  and  the 
Blessed  Lord  Shiva,  moved  by  the  distress  of  the  gods  and 
the  words  of  Shri  Vishnu,  drank  the  dreadful  poison,  as  if  it 
were  nectar,  and  returned  to  Kailasha. 

"  O  Prince  of  Raghu,  the  devas  and  the  daityas  began  churning 
once  more,  but  the  churning  staff  began  to  sink.  Then  the 
devas  and  gandharvas  praised  the  Lord  Vishnu,  saying :   *  O 

1  Diti — a  goddess,  mother  of  the  titans,  daityas. 

*  Aditi — a  goddess,  denoting  "  infinity  ",  mother  of  the  gods,  adityas. 

1  Shri  Hari — another  title  oTthe  Lord  Vishnu. 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 

Blessed  Lord,  Thou  art  the  Master  of  all  beings,  thou  art  the 
asylum  of  the  gods — protect  us  all,  O  Great  Lord,  and  support 
the  sinking  Mandara  mountain/ 

"  Shri  Vishnu,  assuming  the  form  of  a  tortoise,  entered  the 
ocean  and  supported  the  mountain  on  his  back.  Taking  hold 
of  the  peak  in  his  hand,  the  blessed  Vishnu  churned  the  ocean, 
standing  between  the  devas  and  the  asuras. 

"After  a  thousand  years,  Shri  Dhanwantari,1  the  teacher  of 
the  Ayur  Veda  appeared,  holding  a  staff  and  loshta  in  his  hands ; 
thereafter  many  nymphs  emerged.  O  Raghava,  they  were  called 
apsaras,  *  ap '  meaning  water  and  '  yara '  to  '  emerge  from ' ; 
on  this  account  these  beautiful  damsels  were  named  *  apsaras.' 
O  Rama,  they  numbered  six  hundred  million  and  their  female 
attendants  were  innumerable.  None  were  received  either  by 
the  devas  or  the  daityas,  hence  they  remained  without  a  lord. 

°  Then,  O  Prince,  Varuni,8  the  daughter  of  the  god  Varuna2 
was  born.  The  sons  of  Aditi  did  not  accept  her,  but  the  asuras 
gladly  did  so.  Those  who  rejected  her  were  called  suras3 
(devas)  and  those  who  received  her  became  merry  and  were 
called  asuras. 

"  O  Raghava,  then  the  celestial  horse  Uchchaihshravas  and 
the  jewel  Kaustubha  also  rose  out  of  the  sea,  and  they  were 
succeeded  by  the  water  of  immortality. 

"  O  Rama,  the  devas  fought  with  the  danavas*  for  possession 
of  the  nectar  and  the  daityas  allied  themselves  with  the  asuras 
in  this  struggle ;  terrible  indeed  was  this  combat. 

"Aftei  many  had  lost  their  lives  in  the  fight,  Shri  Vishnu 
assumed  the  form  of  Mohini,  a  charming  woman  the  product 
of  Maya5  and  stole  the  nectar  from  the  combatants. 

"  Those  who  opposed  the  imperishable  Vishnu  were  destroyed 
by  him.  In  this  conflict  the  gods  slew  countless  daityas.6 
Indra,  after  slaying  the  asuras,  became  the  king  of  the  devas 
and  with  the  help  of  the  sages  began  to  rule  with  joy." 

1  Dhanwantari— physician  of  the  gods. 

*  Varuni — litcralfy  "  wine  ",  the  daughter  of  Varuna,  the  Lord  of  waters. 
1  Suras — another  name  for  the  gods. 

*  Danavas — Giants  who  warred  against  the  gods. 

*  Maya — the   indescribable,  indefinable  principle  or  power  by  which  all 

creatures  are  deluded.     (For  further  explanation  refer  to  glossary.) 

*  Daityas — Titans. 

92 


BALA    KANDA 

CHAPTER    46 

Diti  undergoes  severe  austerities  for  the  birth  of  a  son 

"  O  Rama,  learning  that  her  children  had  been  slain,  Diti 
was  much  afflicted  and  approached  her  husband  Kasyapa1 
with  the  words :  '  O  Lord,  by  thy  powerful  sons,  am  I 
bereft  of  my  children.  I  desire  a  son  who  will  be  able  to 
destroy  India,  though  to  this  end  I  must  undergo  great 
penance.  Such  austerities  I  will  perform,  if  thou  wilt  grant 
me  a  son  that  is  mighty,  valorous,  strong-willed  and  firm  of 
purpose.* 

"  The  holy  sage  answered  the  afflicted  Diti  saying :  '  Be  it 
so  !  Remain  chaste  for  a  thousand  years,  thou  shalt  then  bear 
a  son  capable  of  destroying  Indra.  By  my  grace,  thy  child 
shall  be  the  ruler  of  the  three  worlds.' 

"  Thus  did  the  sage  console  Did,  and  blessing  her,  departed 
to  practise  penance.  Diti  retired  contentedly  to  the  forest 
of  Kushaplava  and  began  to  undergo  severe  austerities. 

"  Indra  then,  coming  there,  paid  reverence  to  her  and  began 
to  serve  her  with  humility,  supplying  her  with  fire,  kusha  grass3 
and  other  necessities,  massaging  her  body  when  she  became 
weak  from  the  severity  of  ascetic  practices.  O  Rama,  Indra 
served  Diti  for  a  thousand  years  less  ten  days. 

"  Then  Diti  joyfully  addressed  Indra  saying :  *  O  Indra,  thy 
father  has  promised  to  grant  me  a  son  after  a  thousand  years 
penance.  Thou  shalt  soon  behold  thy  brother,  whom  I  desire 
shall  overcome  thee.  With  him  thou  shalt  share  the  three 
worlds  and  be  happy,  have  no  anxiety.' 

"  By  this  time  the  afternoon  had  come.  Diti  overcome  with 
sleep,  placing  her  feet  where  her  head  had  lain,  carelessly 
assumed  an  impure  posture. 

"  Indra  rejoiced  and  laughed  aloud.  Entering  her  body,  he 
cut  the  foetus  into  seven  pieces  with  his  great  mace.  Dili's 
slumber  was  interrupted  by  the  cry  of  the  child  in  her  womb. 

1  Kasyapa — a  Vcdic  sage. 

1  Kusha  gran — sacred  grass  used  in  religious  ceremonies,  a  grass  of  long  stalks 
and  pointed  leaves.     (Desnostachya  bipinnata.) 

93 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 

Indra  said  to  it  *  Do  not  weep  *,  *  Do  not  weep  ',  and  again 
divided  the  child  with  his  mace,  despite  Diti*s  cries,  '  Do  not 
destroy  it,  do  not  destroy  it '. 

"  Then  Indra  paused  in  his  murderous  assault  and  with 
extreme  humility  addressed  Diti  saying  *  O  Diti,  thou  wast 
impure  through  sleeping  with  thy  feet  towards  the  head  of  the 
couch,  thou  did'st  thus  occupy  an  improper  posture.  I  have, 
therefore,  severed  thine  unborn  child  into  seven  parts,  since  he 
was  to  be  the  cause  of  my  destruction.    O  Devi,  pardon  me  V* 


chapter   47 

The  holy  sage  and  the  princes  arrive  at  Vtskala 
and  are  welcomed  by  King  Pramati 

Knowing  the  foetus  to  be  divided  into  seven  parts,  Diti  was 
greatly  perturbed  and  said  to  Indra : — 

"Through  my  fault  has  this  come  to  pass ;  O  Indra,  thou  art 
in  no  wise  guilty.  This  child  being  divided,  for  thy  good  and 
mine  own,  I  declare  that  these  seven  shall  become  the  protectors 
of  the  forty-nine  winds.  These  seven  sons  of  divine  appearance 
shall  be  known  as  the  Bala-kanda  winds.  Let  one  wander  about 
in  the  region  of  Brahma,  another  in  the  region  of  Indra,  and 
the  third  in  space.  Let  the  remaining  four  winds  go  anywhere 
under  thy  instructions ;  may  they  all  be  known  by  the  name 
of  Maruts,  conferred  on  them  by  thee." 

With  joined  palms,  the  thousand-eyed  god  Indra  said  in  reply 
to  Diti :  "  O  Devi,  it  will  assuredly  come  to  pass  as  thou 
desireth.  Thy  sons  shall  wander  about  in  the  form  of  devas 
in  the  Tapovana  forest." 

Thus  reconciled  and  fully  satisfied  the  mother  and  son 
ascended  to  heaven. 

Thus  have  I  heard,  O  Rama  !    This  is  that  Tapovana  forest 
in  which  Indra  formerly  served  his  mother  Diti.     O   Lion 
among  Men,  here  a  great  city  was  founded  by  the  righteous 
Prince  Vishala,  the  son  of  King  Ikswaku  and  Alambusa. 
94 


BALA    KANDA 

O  Rama*  the  mighty  son  of  Vishala  was  named  Hemachandra, 
and  his  son  was  the  renowned  Suchandra.  O  Rama,  the  son 
of  Suchandra  was  Dhumrashwa  and  his  son  was  Srinjaya. 
The  glorious  Sahadeva  was  the  son  of  Srinjaya  and  the  son 
of  Sahadeva  was  the  highly  virtuous  Krishashwa. 

The  son  of  Krishashwa  was  Somadatta  and  his  son  was 
Kakustha.  The  most  illustrious  and  invincible  of  warriors 
King  Pramati  the  son  of  Kakustha,  is  the  present  ruler  of 
Vishala. 

By  the  grace  of  King  Ikswaku  all  the  rulers  of  Vishala  are 
long  lived,  virtuous  and  mighty. 

O  Rama,  let  us  pass  the  night  here,  and  to-morrow  we  will 
wait  upon  King  Janaka. 

When  the  powerful  King  Pramati  heard  of  Shri  Vishwamitra's 
arrival  in  his  kingdom,  he  went  with  his  spiritual  preceptor 
and  relatives  to  welcome  him. 

With  joined  palms,  they  offered  him  due  worship  and  enquired 
as  to  his  welfare.  The  king  said :  "  O  Muni,  to-day  I  am 
indeed  fortunate  that  thou  hast  been  gracious  enough  to  visit 
my  kingdom.    None  is  more  blessed  than  I." 


CHAPTER    48 

They  come  to  Gautama's  hermitage  and  Vishwamitra 
relates  its  story 

King  Pramati  having  enquired  as  to  the  well-being  of  Shri 
Vishwamitra,  said : — 

"  O  Holy  Sage,  may  the  Lord  protect  those  two  youths ; 
be  gracious  enough  to  tell  me  who  they  may  be.  These  princes, 
equal  to  the  gods  in  power,  walking  with  the  gait  of  an  elephant, 
fearless  as  lions  or  bulls  in  combat,  whose  eyes  resemble  lotuses, 
who  are  armed  with  swords,  bows  and  quivers,  who  rival 
the  heavenly  Aswins1  in  beauty  and  who,  in  the  flower  of  their 

1  Aswini — celestial  horsemen,  twin  sons  of  Surya,  the  sun,  precursors  of  the 
dawn. 

95  H 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 

youth,  appear  like  gods,  visiting  the  earth.  Why  are  they 
travelling  on  foot  ?  Whose  sons  are  they  ?  Why  are  they 
come  ?  Enhancing  the  earth  as  the  sun  and  moon  illumine 
the  sky ;  their  manner  of  address  and  bearing  showing  them 
to  be  kinsmen,  why  are  these  two  heroes  of  high  descent, 
bearing  mighty  weapons,  found  on  this  hard  path?  I  long 
to  hear.*' 

Shri  Vishwamitra  related  to  the  king  the  whole  story  of  the 
visit  to  the  Siddha  Ashrama  and  the  slaying  of  the  asuras. 

The  king  was  highly  gratified  to  meet  the  princes,  and 
perceiving  them  to  be  virtuous,  entertained  them  with  the 
greatest  respect.  Shri  Ramachandra  and  Lakshmana  having 
received  hospitality  from  King  Pramati,  passed  the  night 
there.  The  following  day  they  left  for  Mithilapuri,  the  capital 
of  King  Janafca. 

When  they  beheld  the  city  at  a  distance,  they  cried  out : 
"  How  beautiful,  how  beautiful  it  is  !  "  Thereafter,  finding  a 
charming  hermitage  which  was  uninhabited,  Rama  enquired  of 
the  Rishi  Vishwamitra  as  follows :  "  O  Sage,  how  can  it  be 
that  this  beautiful  hermitage  is  unfrequented  ?  O  Lord,  tell  us 
whose  has  been  this  hermitage  ?  " 

Shri  Vishwamitra,  chief  among  the  eloquent,  answered  Rama, 
saying :  "  O  Prince,  hear  the  true  story  of  this  hermitage,  I 
will  relate  to  thee  who  was  its  author  and  how  he  cursed  it 
in  anger. 

"  O  Rama,  this  place,  a  source  of  wonder  even  to  the  gods, 
belonged  to  the  Rishi  Gautama  and  resembled  the  abode  of 
the  celestials.  Here  with  Ahalya,  the  sage  practised  Yoga  for 
thousands  of  years. 

"  O  Rama,  one  day,  the  sage  having  gone  to  a  distant  place, 
Indra,  finding  Ahalya  alone,  assumed  his  form,  and  said  to  her : 
*  O  Fair  One,  I  am  overcome  by  desire,  let  us  carry  out  our 
conjugal  duty.* 

"  O  Raghava,  though  Ahalya  recognized  Indra  disguised  as 
her  lord,  yet  she  acceded  to  his  request.  Then  Ahalya  addressed 
Indra  saying :  *  O  Indra,  I  am  highly  gratified,  now  depart 
quickly,  unobserved.  O  Chief  of  the  gods,  preserve  me  and 
thyself  from  Gautama.' 

"  Indra  laughed  and  answered :  *  O  Thou  of  beautiful  waist, 
96 


BALA    KANDA 

to-day  I  rejoice,  I  will  now  depart  for  my  own  region.'  On  this, 
he  sought  to  leave  the  hut  of  Ahalya. 

"  O  Rama,  at  that  instant  he  observed  the  Rishi  Gautama 
entering  the  hut  and  he  became  agitated  and  anxious.  Seeing 
the  holy  sage  unconquered  by  devas  or  danavas,  endowed  with 
the  power  of  Yoga,  drenched  with  holy  water,  shining  like  fire, 
holding  the  sacred  fuel  and  kusha  grass  in  his  hands,  Indra 
was  terrified  and  grew  pale. 

"  Shri  Gautama  perceiving  Indra  in  his  own  guise  and 
judging  by  his  guilty  looks  that  he  was  leaving  his  spouse 
having  committed  sin  with  her,  cursed  him  saying : — 

"  •  O  Wicked  Wretch,  assuming  my  form,  thou  hast  committed 
this  sinful  act.  Be  thou  impotent.'  Cursed  by  the  Rishi  Gautama, 
Indra  was  instantly  deprived  of  bis  manhood.  Then  the  Sage 
Gautama  cursed  Ahalya  also  saying :  *  Thou  shalt  remain 
immovable  in  this  place  for  thousands  of  years,  thy  food  the 
wind  alone.  Thou  shalt  be  as  dust,  invisible  to  all  creatures. 
When  Rama,  the  son  of  Dasaratha  visits  this  forest,  then  shalt 
thou  be  cleansed  from  thy  sin.  Having  served  him,  O  Deluded 
One  without  desire  for  personal  gain,  thou  shalt  be  restored 
to  me  in  thy  present  body/ 

"  Thus  did  the  illustrious  Gautama  curse  the  wicked  Ahalya 
and,  abandoning  the  hermitage,  began  his  yogic  penances,  on 
the  beautiful  peak  of  Himalaya,  inhabited  by  siddhas." 


chapter   49 

Shri  Rama  liberates  Ahalya  from  Gautama's  curse 

and  departs  for  Mithila 

Deprived  of  his  virility,  Indra  grew  melancholy,  and  addressing 
Agni  and  the  other  gods,  said :  "  By  obstructing  the  ascetic 
practices  of  the  Mahatma  Gautama,  who  sought  to  usurp  my 
power,  I  have  verily  served  the  purpose  of  the  gods.  Evoking 
his  wrath,  by  causing  him  to  curse  me  and  denounce  Ahalya, 
97 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 

I  have  robbed  the  rishi  of  his  spiritual  power,  therefore,  O  Devas, 
O  Divine  Beings,  help  me  now  to  recover  my  manhood." 

Then  the  gods  with  Agni  at  their  head,  approached  the 
pittris,  kavyavahanas  and  other  beings  and  said  to  them :  "  Indra 
has  been  deprived  of  his  virility ;  this  ram  of  yours  is  in  full 
possession  of  its  powers,  allow  us  to  graft  the  testicles  of  the  ram 
on  to  Indra,  we  can  compensate  the  ram  in  this  wise — from 
to-day,  let  those  who  desire  to  propitiate  you,  offer  the  sacrifice 
of  a  castrated  ram  and  receive  the  reward  of  great  merit  at  your 
hands." 

The  pittris  did  as  requested  by  Agni  and  grafted  the  testicles 
of  the  ram  on  to  Indra.  From  that  time,  O  Rama,  they  have 
accepted  the  sacrifice  of  a  gelded  ram. 

This  event  proves  the  immeasurable  power  of  the  practices 
of  the  holy  sage.  Now  let  us  enter  his  hermitage.  O  Rama, 
do  thou  liberate  the  unfortunate  Ahalya,  so  that  she  may  once 
more  resume  her  nymph-like  form." 

Shri  Rama  accepted  the  command  and  entered  the  hermitage, 
preceded  by  the  Sage  Vishwamitra.  There  they  beheld  Ahalya, 
by  virtue  of  her  yogic  practices.  Unperceived  by  devas,  asuras 
or  men,  it  seemed  as  if  Brahma  had  created  her  with  his  own 
hands  as  a  great  mistress  of  occult  powers.  Resembling  the 
full  moon  veiled  in  mist  or  the  reflection  of  the  sun  in  water 
or  a  bright  fire  wreathed  in  smoke,  by  the  curse  of  the  Rishi 
Gautama  she  remained  invisible  and  thus  it  was  ordained  she 
should  remain  till  she  beheld  Shri  Ramachandra  and  till  that 
hour,  none  in  the  three  worlds  should  look  on  her. 

With  the  deepest  reverence  did  Shri  Rama  and  Lakshmana 
touch  the  feet  of  Ahalya  and  she,  remembering  the  words  of 
the  Rishi  Gautama  fell  down  in  devotion  before  them.  There- 
after, she  entertained  them  with  due  hospitality,  as  enjoined 
in  the  scriptures,  while  the  two  princes  acknowledged  the  honour 
paid  to  them.  At  this  moment  a  rain  of  flowers  fell  from  the  sky, 
scattered  by  the  gods ;  heavenly  musicians  sang  and  celestial 
nymphs  danced  whilst  all  rejoiced  and  paid  homage  to 
Ahalya. 

The  illustrious  Sage  Gautama  becoming  aware  of  the  matter 
through  his  divine  powers,  repaired  to  the  hermitage  and  rejoiced 
to  behold  Ahalya  restored  to  her  former  state.  Re-united,  they 
98 


BALA    KANDA 

both  worshipped  the  glorious  Rama  and  then  resumed  their 
spiritual  life  together. 

Shri  Rama,  having  accepted  the  homage  offered  to  him, 
departed  thence  for  Mithila. 


chapter   50 

They  are  welcomed  at  the  place  of  sacrifice  by  King  Janaka 

Preceded  by  Shri  Vishwamitra,  Shri  Rama  and  Lakshmana 
came  to  the  king's  place  of  sacrifice.  Beholding  the  sacrificial 
pavilion,  they  said  to  the  holy  sage  :  "  How  well  has  the  great 
Janaka  prepared  for  the  sacrifice !  O  August  Rishi,  thousands 
of  brahmins  learned  in  the  Vedas,  from  many  lands,  with 
hundreds  of  bullock  carts  transporting  their  possessions,  can  be 
seen  here.  O  Holy  Father,  let  us  choose  a  place  where  thou 
mayest  rest." 

The  Sage  thereupon  selected  a  place  which  was  secluded 
and  supplied  with  water. 

Hearing  of  the  arrival  of  Shri  Vishwamitra,  King  Janaka, 
accompanied  by  his  illustrious  priest,  Shri  Shatananda,  and 
many  others,  hastened  to  that  place  and  humbly  offered  obeisance 
to  the  holy  sage.  Then  the  king  placed  the  traditional  gifts 
of  water  sweetened  with  honey1  before  him  and  he,  accepting 
the  gifts,  enquired  as  to  the  king's  welfare  and  further  whether 
the  sacrifice  was  proceeding  without  hindrance ;  he  then  duly 
inquired  concerning  the  welfare  of  Shri  Shatananda  and  other 
holy  men  in  attendance  on  their  sovereign. 

The  king  received  all  with  a  cheerful  countenance  and  with 
joined  palms  said  to  Shri  Vishwamitra :  "  O  August  Lord, 
please  be  seated  with  the  other  great  sages."  Thus  requested, 
they  sat  down,  after  which  Janaka  with  his  family  priest, 
DKuimins  and  counsellors  occupied  their  places,  the  king  seated 
in  the  midst  of  his  ministers. 

1  Madhu  parka — a  mixture  of  curds,  butter,  honey  and  the  milk  of  coconut 
— a  traditional  offering. 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 

Having  attended  to  the  due  placing  of  his  guests,  the  illustrious 
sovereign  said :  "  O  Lord,  to-day,  by  the  grace  of  the  gods, 
all  the  preparations  for  the  sacrifice  have  been  carried  out,  now 
by  thine  advent  here  I  have  acquired  merit  equal  to  the  fruit 
of  my  sacrifice.  Blessed  am  I  that  thou  hast  honoured  the  place 
of  sacrifice  with  thy  presence.  O  Divine  Sage,  the  high  priests 
have  informed  me  that  the  sacrifice  will  be  completed  in  the 
course  of  twelve  days,  the  gods  will  then  come  to  take  their 
share ;  Thou,  O  Illustrious  Lord,  shalt  behold  them." 

Having  thus  addressed  the  sage,  the  king  again  earnestly 
enquired  of  him,  saying :  "  May  prosperity  attend  thee ! 
O  Sage,  who  are  these  two  illustrious  princes,  equalling  the  gods 
in  power,  whose  bearing  resembles  the  majesty  of  an  elephant, 
or  a  lion,  who  are  valiant  and  whose  eyes  are  like  lotuses,  who 
are  armed  with  swords,  bows  and  quivers  and  whose  beauty 
rivals  the  Aswini-Kumara,  who  are  youthful  and  appear  to 
have  descended  from  heaven  to  earth  like  the  gods  ?  Have 
they  come  here  on  foot  ?  Whose  sons  are  they  ?  They,  whose 
eyes  are  wide  set  and  who  are  armed  with  sacred  weapons, 
who  wear  their  hair  like  Karttikeya1  and  who  captivate  the  hearts 
of  men  by  their  magnanimous  and  virtuous  qualities  ?  Surely 
they  are  come  hither  to  exalt  our  hearts  and  add  to  the  fame 
of  our  dynasty  ?  Adorning  the  earth  as  the  sun  or  moon  adorn 
the  sky,  in  stature  and  bearing  resembling  each  other,  O  Great 
Sage,  whose  sons  are  they  ?    Please  tell  me  all !  " 

Hearing  the  words  of  King  Janaka,  Shri  Vishwamitra  said : 
*'  These  are  the  sons  of  King  Dasaratha." 

He  then  told  the  king  of  their  residence  in  the  Siddha-Asrama 
and  of  the  slaying  of  the  demons,  of  their  visit  to  Vishala  and 
the  rescue  of  Ahalya,  also  of  their  meeting  with  the  Sage 
Gautama.  Then  he  said :  "  Now  have  we  come  to  see  the 
great  bow." 

Having  related  all  this  to  the  king,  the  great  muni  became 
silent. 


1  Karttikeya — the  god  of  war ;   the  hair  was  shaved  cm  the  crown  and  the 
two  side  pieces  like  crows'  wings  left  at  the  side. 


BALA    KANDA 

CHAPTER    5  I 

Gautama's  son,  Shatananda,  relates  more  of  the  story 
of  the  Sage  Vishwamitra 

Having  heard  the  words  of  the  wise  Vishwamitra,  Shri  Shat- 
ananda, the  eldest  son  of  the  Sage  Gautama,  resplendent  by 
virtue  of  his  practice  of  Yoga,  was  filled  with  wonder  and  delight 
and,  beholding  Shri  Rama  was  astonished. 

Seeing  the  two  princes  sitting  at  their  ease,  Shri  Shatananda 
said  to  the  Sage  Vishwamitra :  "  O  Holy  Sage,  was  my  mother, 
so  long  involved  in  the  practice  of  austerity,  shown  by  thee 
to  Shri  Ramachandra  ?  O  Illustrious  One,  did  my  mother  enter- 
tain these  two  heroes  worthy  of  adoration  with  fruits  and  those 
things  she  was  able  to  obtain  in  the  hermitage  ? 

"  O  Holy  Rishi,  didst  thou  relate  the  story  of  the  improper 
behaviour  of  Indra  to  my  mother  in  bygone  days,  to  Shri 
Ramachandra?  O  Holy  One,  by  virtue  of  the  advent  of 
Shri  Rama,  did  my  mother  obtain  my  father's  favour  once 
more  ?  O  Kaushika,  did  my  father  duly  honour  Shri  Rama- 
chandra and  is  this  Illustrious  One,  having  received  the  hospitality 
of  my  parents,  really  come  hither  ?  O  Holy  Sage,  please  tell 
me;  when  my  tranquil-minded  sire  entered  the  hermitage, 
was  he  honoured  by  Shri  Rama  ?  " 

Shri  Vishwamitra,  skilled  in  the  art  of  converse  and  acquainted 
with  the  laws  of  rhetoric,  answered  Shri  Shatananda  saying  : — 

"  O  Great  Muni,  I  did  that  which  should  be  done,  by  speaking 
that  which  was  proper  to  the  occasion,  and  patiently  listening 
to  that  which  was  spoken,  recollecting  my  duty.  As  Jamadagni, 
who  first  cursed  Renuka  and  was  then  reconciled  to  her,  so  has 
thy  father  shown  favour  to  thy  mother  and  received  her  again." 
Hearing  the  words  of  Shri  Vishwamitra,  the  great  Shatananda 
addressed  Shri  Ramachandra,  saying :  "  O  Great  One,  may 
thy  coming  be  the  source  of  prosperity  to  all.  It  is  fortunate 
indeed  that  thou  didst  visit  my  father's  hermitage  and  restore 
my  mother  to  her  former  state.  How  can  I  sufficiently  praise 
that  mighty  Sage  Shri  Vishwamitra,  reverenced  by  all  the 
sages.  O  Rama,  enlightened  are  his  actions ;  by  virtue  of  his 
xoi 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI' 

holy  practices  he  has  become  a  brahmarishi1  though  previously 
a  royal  sage.  Among  brahmarishis  he  is  unique,  he  is  known 
to  me  as  one  who  is  ever  concerned  with  the  good  of  all.  O 
Rama,  none  is  equal  to  thee  on  earth,  since  thou  art  protected 
by  so  great  a  sage  as  Vishwamitra.  Hear  while  I  relate  the  story 
of  the  great  Kaushika2  to  thee : — 

"  In  the  past,  this  holy  sage  was  a  virtuous  monarch,  versed 
in  all  branches  of  learning,  delighting  in  the  welfare  of  his 
subjects  and  the  destroyer  of  his  foes. 

"  Kusha,  the  righteous  and  powerful  king,  was  the  son  of 
Prajapati,  and  his  son  was  Gadhi,  and  the  great  and  illustrious 
Sage  Vishwamitra  is  the  son  of  Gadhi. 

"  On  ascending  the  throne,  King  Vishwamitra  ruled  the  earth 
for  many  thousands  of  years.  At  a  certain  time,  King  Vish- 
wamitra, assembling  his  army,  set  out  to  range  the  earth. 
O  Rama,  he  passed  through  many  cities  and  kingdoms  and 
crossed  innumerable  rivers,  mountains  and  forests,  visiting  many 
hermitages  till  he  came  to  the  one  belonging  to  Shri  Vasishtha. 
This  hermitage  was  thickly  planted  with  many-branched  trees 
with  dense  foliage  in  which  birds  of  every  kind  dwelt.  Many 
species  of  beasts  frequented  that  place,  and  the  siddhas  also 
came  there — devas,  gandharvas  and  other  celestial  beings  added 
to  the  peace  and  beauty  of  that  hermitage  by  their  presence. 
Beautiful  birds  flew  about  and  peaceful  deer  wandered  here 
and  there.    Many  learned  brahmins  also  dwelt  in  that  hermitage. 

"  Brahmin  sages  and  also  celestial  rishis  inhabited  that  place, 
so  that  it  shone  like  fire  by  virtue  of  their  presence.  This 
hermitage  sheltered  many  great  Vedic  scholars  equal  to  Brahma, 
some  living  only  on  air,  some  on  water,  some  on  dry  leaves. 
Other  sages  lived  on  fruit  and  roots,  and  there  were  in  addition 
thousands  of  brahmacharis  fully  self-subdued. 

"  Each  sage  observed  the  sacred  traditions,  performing  his 
morning  and  evening  devotions,  repeating  the  silent  prayer  (japa) 
offering  water  to  the  spirits  of  his  ancestors,  and  pouring  obla- 
tions into  the  sacrificial  fire. 

1  Brahmarishi — There  are  four  kinds  of  sages  or  rishis  :  The  Rajarishi  or  royal 
•age,  the  Mahariahi  or  great  sage,  the  Brahmarishi  or  sacred  sage  and  the  Devariihi 
or  divine  sage.     The  ascending  scale  culminates  in  the  Devariihi. 

1  Kaushika — The  name  of  Vishwamitra,  he  being  the  son  of  King  Kusilca,  or 
Kusha. 


BALA    KANDA 
"Many  retired  householders  practising  Yoga,  dwelt  there 
with  their  wives.    Verily  that  hermitage  resembled  the  abode 
of  Brahma,  and  the  great  and  powerful  King  Vishwamitra 
rejoiced  to  behold  it." 


chapter   52 

How  King  Vishwamitra  visits  Skri  Vasishtha's  hermitage 

and  accepts  hospitality  provided  by  the  wish-fulfilling  cow, 

Skabala 

Beholding  the  hermitage,  the  mighty  Vishwamitra  filled  with 
joy,  bowed  with  great  humility  to  Shri  Vasishtha  who  was 
engaged  in  the  telling  of  his  rosary. 

Shri  Vasishtha  welcomed  the  king  and  bade  him  be  seated, 
and  he  having  done  so  was  offered  the  fruits  and  roots  that 
grew  in  that  place. 

Honoured  by  the  holy  sage,  King  Vishwamitra  enquired  of 
him  if  all  were  well  with  the  fire  sacrifice,  his  spiritual  practices 
and  his  disciples.  Shri  Vasishtha  related  to  him  all  that 
concerned  his  welfare  and  the  welfare  of  those  in  the  hermitage, 
even  to  the  trees  themselves. 

Sitting  at  ease,  Shri  Vasishtha  said  to  King  Vishwamitra, 
eminent  among  yogis  and  a  son  of  Shri  Brahma  himself :  "  O 
King,  is  it  well  with  thee  in  all  ways  ?  Dost  thou  give  satisfaction 
to  thy  subjects  in  accordance  with  the  law  of  righteousness  and 
dost  thou  rule  and  protect  thy  people  according  to  the  spiritual 
law  ?  Is  thy  revenue  justly  received  and  increased  ?  Is  it 
judiciously  administered  and  distributed  to  those  who  are  eligible 
and  deserving?  Are  thy  servants  remunerated  at  the  proper 
season  ?  Do  thy  subjects  willingly  obey  thee  ?  O  Sovereign, 
hast  thou  subdued  thine  enemies  ?  O  Sinless  King,  is  it  well 
with  thine  army,  thy  treasury,  thy  friends,  thy  sons  and 
grandsons  ?  " 

In  reply  to  these  questions,  King  Vishwamitra  humbly 
answered :  "All  is  well,  my  Lord  I " 

Conversing  pleasantly  together  tor  a  long  time,  recounting 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 

the  ancient  traditions  to  each  other,  they  thus  promoted  their 
mutual  delight, 

O  Prince  of  the  House  of  Raghu,  when  King  Vishwamitra 
paused,  Shri  Vasishtha  said  to  him  smilingly :  "  O  King, 
although  thou  hast  with  thee  a  large  retinue,  yet  it  is  my  desire 
to  offer  thee  hospitality,  together  with  thine  army.  Be  pleased 
to  accept  it.  Since  thou  art  a  distinguished  guest,  it  is  meet 
that  I  should  do  all  within  my  power  to  entertain  thee,  therefore, 
be  gracious  enough  to  receive  the  little  I  have  to  offer." 

King  Vishwamitra  answered :  "  O  Lord,  thy  gentle  and 
pleasing  words  are  sufficient  entertainment.  Moreover,  thou 
hast  already  presented  me  with  fruits  and  the  clear  water  of 
thy  hermitage.  By  meeting  with  thee  alone,  am  I  sufficiently 
honoured.  O  Supremely  Wise  One,  it  was  proper  that  I  should 
offer  obeisance  to  thee ;  now  thou  hast  entertained  me,  allow  me 
to  offer  thee  salutations  and  depart." 

The  great  sage  declined  to  accept  the  king's  refusal  of  his 
offer,  and  still  insisted  that  he  should  entertain  him. 

Then  Vishwamitra  said :  "  Be  it  according  to  thy  pleasure, 
my  Lord,  I  will  do  as  thou  desirest." 

At  these  words,  Shri  Vasishtha  sent  for  his  favourite  spotted 
cow  Kamadhenu  and  said  to  her :  "  O  Shabala,  draw  near  and 
listen  to  me,  I  desire  to  offer  hospitality  to  the  king  and  his  army. 
O  Dear  One,  thou  art  the  wish-fulfilling  cow  and  can  accomplish 
anything,  therefore,  now  prepare  splendid  dishes  which  will  be 
pleasing  to  them,  of  the  six  kinds  of  taste.1  Produce  speedily 
whatever  food  can  be  eaten,  drunk,  licked  or  sucked." 


CHAPTER   53 

The  king  desires  to  possess  Shabala  but  Shri  Vasishtha  will  not 
give  her  up 

The  cow  Shabala  provided  for  the  needs  of  all  according  to 
the  instruction  of  Shri  Vasishtha.  Sugar  cane,  sweets  of  various 
kinds,  honey,  crushed  barley,  wine  and  other  excellent  drinks, 

1  The  six  kinds  of  taste  :  sweet,  bitter,  acid,  salt,  pungent  and  acrid. 
104 


BALA    KANDA 

hot  rice  in  heaps  as  high  as  mountains,  milk,  curry  and  other 
fare  combining  the  six  tastes  and  countless  other  dishes  with 
sweets  made  of  jagari1  were  distributed.  Each  was  wholly 
satisfied  and  delighted  with  the  hospitality  of  Shri  Vasishtha, 
who  accorded  to  all  the  companions  and  retainers  of  King 
Vishwamitra  the  full  extent  of  their  desires. 

The  king  with  his  family  priests,  ministers  and  attendants, 
partaking  of  the  feast  offered  with  generosity  and  respect  by 
the  great  sage,  was  highly  gratified. 

When  all  the  counsellors  and  personal  attendants  and  the  army 
had  received  full  hospitality,  the  king,  wholly  satisfied,  said  to 
Shri  Vasishtha :  "  O  Holy  Sage,  thou  hast  entertained  me 
royally,  please  hear  what  I  have  to  say  O  Eloquent  One !  O 
Lord,  give  me  the  cow  Shabala  in  exchange  for  a  hundred 
thousand  excellent  cows.  Shabala  is  a  jewel  and  by  a  king 
should  jewels  be  enjoyed — according  to  the  natural  law,  this 
treasure  should  therefore  be  mine." 

Shri  Vasishtha  answered,  saying :  "  O  King,  I  will  not  part 
with  Shabala  in  exchange  for  ten  million  cows,  still  less  for 
a  hundred  thousand.  If  thou  did'st  offer  me  mountains  of  silver 
yet  would  I  refuse  to  give  thee  Shabala  for  she  must  remain 
in  my  hermitage. 

"  O  King,  as  a  righteous  man  cares  for  his  good  name,  so 
do  I  for  Shabala.  She  helps  me  to  satisfy  the  devas,  the  pittris 
and  other  beings.  My  sacred  fire  sacrifice  and  other  Vedic  rites, 
besides  the  various  branches  of  learning  depend  on  Shabala. 
O  Great  Ruler,  indeed  I  cannot  relinquish  this  cow,  she  is 
my  all  and  she  fulfils  all  my  needs — for  these  and  numerous 
other  reasons  do  I  refuse  to  yield  the  cow  to  thee.  O  King, 
verily  I  will  not  part  with  Shabala." 

The  words  of  Shri  Vasishtha  merely  increased  the  king's 
desire  and  he,  under  great  emotion,  declared  with  passion : 
"  O  Great  Muni,  I  will  give  thee  fourteen  thousand  elephants 
adorned  with  golden  trappings,  ornaments  and  goads  and,  in 
addition,  I  will  give  thee  a  hundred  and  eight  chariots  made 
of  solid  gold,  each  driven  by  four  milk  white  horses.  At  the 
same  time,  I  offer  thee  eleven  thousand  well-trained  horses, 
each  with  a  golden  harness  and  further  ten  million  cows  of 

1  Jagari — coarse  brown  Indian  sugar  made  from  palm  tap. 

105 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 

varied  colours,  that  ate  young  and  healthy.  O  give  me  Shabala, 
and  I  will  give  thee  in  exchange  as  much  gold  as  thou  desirest. 
Grant  me  Shabala,  I  implore  thee,  and  accept  my  gifts,  O  Sage." 
Then  the  wise  Vasishtha  said :  "  Under  no  condition  can  I 
part  with  Shabala,  O  King,  she  is  my  jewel  and  my  wealth. 
She  is  my  very  life,  my  all-in-all,  and  she  furnishes  me  with 
alms  and  all  I  require  for  sacrifice.  In  brief,  O  King,  Shabala 
is  the  source  of  my  spiritual  life  and  I  will  never  give  her 
up." 


CHAPTER     54 

King  Viskwamtra  attempts  to  carry  her  away  by  force 

O  Rama,  perceiving  that  Shri  Vasishtha  would  not  willingly 
consent  to  part  with  the  cow,  Vishwamitra  resolved  to  carry 
her  away  by  force. 

O  Raghava,  while  Shabala  was  being  forcibly  carried  off, 
distracted  with  grief,  she  began  to  reflect  thus  :  "  Why  has  the 
holy  Vasishtha  abandoned  me  ?  In  what  way  have  I  offended 
the  holy  sage  ?  Why  are  the  servants  of  the  king  dragging  me 
away  from  the  hermitage  ?  I  am  innocent  and  docile,  the  holy 
muni  is  dear  to  me ;  what  fault  have  I  committed  that  the 
Mahatma  Vasishtha  should  abandon  me  ?  " 

Sighing  again  and  again,  Shabala,  shaking  off  the  hands  of 
the  king's  attendants,  swiftly  ran  and  placed  her  head  at  the  feet 
of  the  holy  sage.  Standing  before  Shri  Vasishtha,  shedding  tears 
and  lamenting  loudly,  she  cried :  "  O  Lord,  O  Son  of  Brahma 
hast  thou  verily  abandoned  me  ?  Why  are  the  servants  of  the 
king  taking  me  away  from  thy  presence,  by  force  ?  " 

Seeing  the  sorely  stricken  Shabala,  Shri  Vasishtha  addressed 
her  as  he  would  his  own  sister,  saying :  "  O  Shabala,  it  is  not 
by  my  will  that  thou  art  thus  being  carried  away,  neither  hast 
thou  offended  me  in  any  way,  O  Dear  One.  Drunk  with  desire, 
the  king  is  taking  thee  from  me  by  force.  I  have  not  the  power 
to  defend  thee.  The  king  is  a  warrior  and  lord  of  the  earth, 
he  is  attended  by  a  mighty  army  with  horses,  elephants  and 
chariots,  verily  he  is  mightier  than  I." 
106 


BALA    KANDA 

Shabala,  who  was  skilled  in  argument,  listened  to  the  words 
of  Shri  Vasishtha  and  said :  "  O  Holy  Sage,  the  power  of  a 
warrior  is  as  nought  compared  to  that  of  a  holy  sage. 
O  Illustrious  Lord,  the  strength  of  a  sage  is  divine  and  based 
on  the  exercise  of  spiritual  practices  and  discipline,  it  is  therefore 
limitless;  thou  art,  O  Lord,  immeasurably  stronger  than  a 
kshatriya.  The  power  of  that  mighty  king  Vishwamitra,  is 
great,  but  he  cannot  equal  thy  strength  and  splendour.  O  Lord, 
through  thy  strength  and  energy  suffer  me  to  destroy  the  power 
and  pride  of  this  wicked  wretch." 

Shri  Vasishtha  answered :  "  Be  it  so  !  Create  an  army  by 
thy  spiritual  energy,  that  will  destroy  the  forces  of  the  king." 

Lowing  loudly,  Shabala,  in  obedience  to  the  sage,  instantly 
produced  hundreds  of  foreign  soldiers,  who  began  to  destroy 
the  army  of  Vishwamitra  while  he  was  looking  on.  Perceiving 
his  army  about  to  be  overthrown,  King  Vishwamitra  became 
enraged  and,  mounting  his  chariot,  his  eyes  red  with  anger, 
he  advanced  to  the  attack.  With  various  weapons,  he  began 
to  slay  thousands  of  men,  and  Shabala,  seeing  the  army  created 
by  her,  annihilated,  now  produced  strange  beings  called  shakas 
in  such  numbers,  that  they  filled  the  whole  earth.  Highly 
valorous,  their  skins  shining  like  gold,  clad  in  yellow  armour, 
furnished  with  scimitars  and  maces,  they  started  to  consume 
the  army  of  Vishwamitra  like  a  raging  fire. 

Then  the  great  Vishwamitra,  with  the  aid  of  yogic  weapons, 
began  to  create  disorder  in  the  ranks  of  the  forces  produced 
by  Shabala. 


chapter   55 

Shabala  creates  an  army  which  annihilates  Vishwamitra' s 
forces 

AS  the  mighty   warriors  fell,  pierced  by  the  weapons  of  \ 
Vishwamitra^  forces,  Shri  Vasishtha  said  to  Shabala:    "O 
Shabala,  create  more  warriors  by  the  power  of  Yoga." 

107 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 

Shabala,  lowing  loudly,  produced  well-armed  soldiers  from 
her  feet  and  udders,  and  from  her  hair  and  thighs  were  born 
the  extraordinary  warriors  Harita  and  Kirata.  By  these,  the 
whole  army  of  Vishwamitra  consisting  of  elephants,  horses  and 
chariots,  was  instantly  destroyed.  Beholding  their  entire  army 
exterminated  by  the  power  of  Shri  Vasishtha,  King  Vishwami- 
tra's  hundred  sons  bearing  mighty  arms  and  with  various 
thought-propelled  weapons  rushed  angrily  at  the  holy  Sage 
Vasishtha.  Shri  Vasishtha  merely  uttered  the  sound  "  H'm !  " 
and  they  were  all  immediately  consumed.  By  the  great  Sage 
Vasishtha,  the  infantry,  cavalry  and  chariots,  together  with  the 
sons  of  King  Vishwamitra,  were  instantly  burned  to  ashes. 

Then  the  illustrious  monarch  Vishwamitra  whose  sons  and 
army  had  been  annihilated,  was  filled  with  shame  and  dismay. 
Deprived  of  his  glory,  he  resembled  a  waveless  ocean  or  a  snake 
bereft  of  its  fangs  or  the  sun  under  eclipse.  Like  a  bird  without 
wings,  his  confidence  shattered,  his  pride  humbled,  he  became 
filled  with  anxiety.  Bestowing  the  kingdom  on  his  only  remain- 
ing son,  he  exhorted  him  to  rule  according  to  dharma  and  then 
himself  retired  to  the  forest  to  practise  asceticism. 

After  some  time,  he  found  favour  with  Shri  Mahadeva1  the 
magnanimous  granter  of  boons,  and  he,  appearing  before 
Vishwamitra,  addressed  him  saying  :  "  O  King,  why  art  thou 
undergoing  penance  ?  What  is  thy  desire  ?  I  will  grant  thee 
whatsoever  thou  asketh  ?  " 

Shri  Vishwamitra  making  obeisance  to  Shri  Mahadeva  said 
to  him :  "  O  Great  God,  if  I  have  found  favour  with  thee, 
then  instruct  me  in  the  Upanishads  and  other  branches  of 
learning,  teach  me  also  the  mysteries  and  the  science  of  archery. 
Whatever  weapons  are  known  to  the  danavas,  yakshas,  asuras 
and  other  beings,  let  them  be  revealed  to  me  by  thy  grace." 

On  hearing  the  request  of  the  king,  Shri  Shiva  answered, 
"  Be  it  so  "  and  returned  to  his  abode. 

King  Vishwamitra,  having  acquired  the  various  weapons  from 
Mahadeva,  became  as  happy  as  the  sea  at  the  time  of  the  full 
moon.  He  now  resolved  to  subdue  the  Sage  Vasishtha  and 
regarded  him  as  his  captive  already. 

Proceeding  to  his  hermitage  he  discharged  his  great  weapons 

1  Mahadeva — Great  God,  a  name  of  Shiva. 
1 08 


BALA    KANDA 

like  rain,  setting  the  forest  of  Tapovan  ablaze.  Afflicted  by  these 
dreadful  weapons,  all  the  sages  began  to  flee  to  the  four  quarters 
in  terror ;  even  the  disciples  of  Shri  Vasishtha,  together  with 
innumerable  birds  and  beasts,  escaped  hastily  in  every  direction. 
The  hermitage  of  Shri  Vasishtha  became  deserted  and  a  deep 
silence  fell  upon  it,  causing  it  to  resemble  a  barren  field. 

Shri  Vasishtha  repeatedly  called  out :  "  Fear  not,  fear  not, 
I  will  destroy  Vishwamitra  as  the  sun  dispels  the  morning 
mist." 

Then  the  great  Sage  Vasishtha,  foremost  among  those  who 
practise  silent  prayer,  angrily  addressed  Vishwamitra  saying : 
"  Thou  hast  destroyed  my  ancient  and  auspicious  hermitage, 
O  Wicked  and  Deluded  Wretch,  thou  thyself  shalt  be  destroyed." 

Snatching  up  his  staff  equal  to  the  rod  of  Yama,  he  advanced 
like  a  naked  name. 


CHAPTER    56 

Shri  Vasishtha  by  his  spiritual  strength  conquers  Vishwamitra 
who  then  engages  in  penances 

Hearing  the  harsh  words  uttered  by  Shri  Vasishtha,  Vishwami- 
tra raising  the  fire  weapon,  cried :  "  Stay !    Beware  !  " 

Then  Shri  Vasishtha,  lifting  up  his  Brahma  staff  in  wrath, 
exclaimed :  "  O  Vilest  of  Warriors,  here  I  stand,  let  loose  all 
thy  weapons,  not  excepting  those  propelled  by  thought  which 
thou  hast  obtained  from  the  Lord  Shiva.  O  Son  of  Gadhi, 
to-day  I  will  deprive  thee  of  all  these  weapons.  How  can  thy 
power  as  a  warrior  compare  with  that  of  a  divine  sage  ?  O 
Stupid  Wretch,  behold  my  divine  energy !  " 

So  saying,  Shri  Vasishtha  quenched  the  dangerous  fire  weapon 
hurled  at  him  by  Vishwamitra  as  water  quenches  fire. 

Then  the  son  of  Gadhi  let  fly  other  dangerous  weapons 

upon  the  holy  sage,  the  Varuna,  the  Rudra,  the  Indra,  the 

Pashupata  and  Ishika  weapons  together  with  the  Manava, 

Mohana,  Gandharva,  Swapana,  Jrimbhana,  Viadana,  Santapana, 

109 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 

and  Vilapana ;  the  Shoshaua,  Darana  and  the  terrible  Vatra ; 
the  Brahma-pasha  and  Kalapasha,  the  Varuna-pasha  and  the 
priceless  Pinaka  and  also  the  missiles  Shushka  and  Ardra,  the 
Danda  weapon  and  the  Pisacha,  the  Krouncha  and  the  Dharma- 
discus,  the  Kala  discus  and  the  discus  of  Vishnu,  also  the 
weapon  Vayuvya,  Mathana  and  Haya-shira  did  he  discharge 
upon  the  great  sage  with  the  two  Shaktis,  the  Kankala,  Mushala, 
Vidyadhara,  Kala,  the  trident  Kapala  and  the  Kankana.  All 
these  did  he  hurl  at  the  holy  sage. 

Then  Shri  Vasishtha  accomplished  a  great  marvel  and  by 
means  of  his  staff  alone  destroyed  all  the  weapons  of  Vishwamitra. 
Seeing  these  weapons  rendered  ineffectual,  Vishwamitra  raised 
the  Brahman-astra.  At  this,  Agni,  the  divine  sages  and  the 
celestial  beings  were  seized  with  terror  and  the  three  worlds 
shook  with  fear.  But  by  means  of  ins  spiritual  power  and  the 
study  and  practice  of  Brahman- Vidya,  Shri  Vasishtha  subdued 
the  Brahman-astra.  As  Shri  Vasishtha  consumed  this  tremen- 
dous weapon,  his  charming  and  pleasing  mien  became  terrible 
and  from  each  pore  of  his  body  shafts  of  light  shot  forth  while 
the  staff  of  the  holy  sage,  shining  like  fire,  burst  into  flame. 

All  the  sages  now  began  to  praise  Shri  Vasishtha,  saying : 
"  Thy  power  is  without  equal  and  ever  productive  of  good, 
by  the  power  of  thy  Yoga,  pacify  the  Brahman-astra.  O  Holy 
Sage,  thou  hast  humbled  the  pride  of  Vishwamitra.  O  Great 
Ascetic,  be  pacified,  that  we  also  may  be  delivered  from  fear." 

Thus  addressed,  Shri  Vasishtha  assumed  his  accustomed  mien 
and  Vishwamitra,  being  defeated,  sighing  heavily,  exclaimed  : 
"  Woe,  woe  to  the  might  of  a  warrior !  The  real  power  is 
the  spiritual  power.  Shri  Vasishtha  by  his  spiritual  strength 
has  fully  conquered  mine.  I  will,  therefore,  abandon  my 
warlike  nature  and  seek  to  obtain  brahmanhood." 


BALA    KANDA 


CHAPTER     57 


Shri  Vasishtha  refuses  to  help  King  Trishanku  enter  heaven 
in  his  physical  state 

The  heart  of  Vishwamitra  was  heavy,  remembering  his  disgrace, 
and  he  was  filled  with  remorse  at  having  borne  enmity  to  Shri 
Vasishtha. 

O  Rama,  with  his  queen  he  went  to  the  southern  quarter 
and  began  his  great  ascetic  penance  there. 

After  a  long  time  four  sons  were  bom  to  him,  each  a  devotee 
of  truth,  who  were  virtuous  and  of  great  military  prowess.  Their 
names  were  Havisyanda,  Madhusyanda,  Drirha-netra  and 
Maharatha. 

Having  practised  severe  austerities  for  a  thousand  years,  the 
Grandsire  of  the  world,  Shri  Brahma  appeared  before  Vishwami- 
tra and  said :  "  O  Son  of  Kaushika,  thou  hast  surpassed  the 
royal  sages  in  thy  great  asceticism,  thou  shalt,  therefore,  be 
numbered  among  them."  Having  thus  spoken,  Shri  Brahma 
with  the  gods  went  to  Brahmaloka. 

Vishwamitra  was  filled  with  shame  and  with  bowed  head, 
overcome  with  grief,  thus  spoke :  "Alas  !  In  spite  of  prolonged 
austerities,  the  gods  still  hold  me  to  be  a  -royal  sage.1  I  deem 
this  state  no  reward  for  the  penance  I  have  undergone." 

O  Rama,  with  renewed  resolve,  Vishwamitra,  pre-eminent  in 
the  field  of  endeavour  began  his  life  of  mortification  anew. 

At  this  time,  the  great  King  Trishanku  of  the  House  of 
Ikswaku,  fully  self-subdued  and  a  lover  of  truth,  resolved  to 
initiate  a  sacrifice  in  order  to  enter  heaven  in  his  physical  body. 
Summoning  the  holy  Sage  Vasishtha,  he  communicated  his 
intention  to  him,  but  the  Mahatma  Vasishtha,  having  duly 
considered  the  matter,  said :  "  O  King,  this  cannot  be." 

Discouraged  by  Shri  Vasishtha  and  for  the  purpose  of  fulfilling 
his  design,  the  monarch  went  southwards  to  where  the  sons 
of  Shri  Vasishtha  abode,  leading  lives  of  purity  and  ascetism. 
When  King  Trishanku  beheld  the  sons  of  his  own  Guru,  that 
great  and  illustrious  sage,  he  was  full  of  shame,  and  with  bowed 

1  Sec  note  on  page  102. 

Ill  I 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 

head  offered  salutation  to  them,  addressing  them  in  great 
humility  saying,  "  O  Protectors  of  those  who  seek  refuge  in 
you,  I  come  to  seek  your  aid.  O  Holy  Ones,  I  besought 
your  sire  to  assist  me  in  the  observance  of  a  sacrifice  and  he 
discouraged  me.  I  have,  therefore,  come  to  seek  your  help 
in  the  matter.  O  Sons  of  my  Holy  Guru,  I  offer  salutations 
to  you.  Again  and  again,  I  bow  down  to  you,  O  Holy  Ones, 
and  beseech  you  to  officiate  at  the  proposed  sacrifice,  which  I 
desire  to  undertake  for  the  fulfilment  of  my  design,  namely 
that  I  may  ascend  to  heaven  in  my  embodied  state.  Discouraged 
by  the  holy  teacher  Vasishtha,  I  consider  that  you  alone  are 
able  to  assist  me.  Should  you  refuse  me,  there  is  none  in  whom 
I  may  take  refuge.  The  kings  of  the  House  of  Ikshwaku  have 
always  sought  guidance  of  their  spiritual  preceptor  in  time  of 
need,  and  the  holy  and  learned  Sage  Vasishtha  has  ever  upheld 
the  dynasty  and,  following  him,  you  alone  are  my 
instructors  ". 


CHAPTER     58 

The  king  appeals  to  Sftri  Vasisktha's  sons  to  conduct 
the  sacrifice.    They  curse  him  and  he  appeals  to  Vishtoamtra 

O  Rama,  hearing  the  words  of  the  king,  the  hundred  sons  of 
Shri  Vasishtha  were  filled  with  wrath  and  said :  "  O  Thou 
Evil-minded  Wretch,  discouraged  by  thy  spiritual  preceptor, 
how  dost  thou  dare  to  seek  our  aid  ?  O  King,  we  know  thee 
to  be  an  ignorant  man.  Shri  Vasishtha  is  able  to  advance  the 
sacrifices  of  the  three  worlds,  verily  thou  art  no  true  disciple 
of  such  a  sage.  Shall  we  render  void  the  utterance  of  our 
great  sire  ?  " 

Hearing  these  harsh  words,  the  king  replied :  "  Discouraged 
by  my  Guru  and  now  by  you,  I  shall  seek  elsewhere  for  aid ; 
may  all  be  well  with  you." 

The  sons  of  the  great  sage  were  enraged  on  hearing  these 
words  spoken  in  defiance,  and  cursed  the  king,  saying :  "  Mayest 


BALA    KANDA 

thou  become  one  of  the  fallen  caste."  Having  thus  cursed  him, 
they  returned  to  their  hermitage. 

When  the  night  was  over,  the  king  was  transformed  into  a 
low-born  being,  his  complexion  dark,  his  body  emaciated,  his 
head  shaven,  his  whole  frame  besmeared  with  ashes  from  the 
crematorium,  bis  golden  ornaments  changed  to  lead. 

When  the  people  of  the  capital  beheld  the  king  in  this 
condition  they  fled  from  that  place,  and  Trishanku  departed,  full 
of  anguish.  Sunk  in  grief  day  and  night,  he  finally  sought  refuge 
with  Shri  Vishwamitra.  That  sage  seeing  the  monarch  deprived 
of  his  kingdom  and  condemned  to  assume  the  form  of  a  low-caste 
being,  was  moved  with  compassion,  and  addressed  him  saying : 
"  O  Mighty  Prince,  mayest  thou  be  prosperous  !  Why  hast 
thou  come  hither  ?  I  know  thee  to  be  the  Sovereign  of  Ayodhya 
that  through  a  curse  art  come  to  this  state." 

The  eloquent  King  Trishanku,  with  joined  palms,  replied 
in  tones  of  submission :  "  O  Great  One,  discouraged  by  my 
Guru  and  his  sons  in  my  desire  to  enter  heaven  in  the  physical 
body,  I  have  been  transformed  by  them  into  a  chandala.1  Now, 
for  shame,  I  may  not  show  myself  to  any.  O  Lord,  I  have  failed 
to  obtain  the  fruit  of  countless  sacrifices,  an  untruth  has  never 
been  uttered  by  me,  I  have  governed  my  people  with  righteous- 
ness and  by  my  conduct  have  satisfied  my  spiritual  preceptor 
and  holy  men.  I  desired  to  undertake  a  further  meritorious 
sacrifice,  but  O  Great  Sage,  my  Guru  has  withheld  his  aid. 
O  Lord,  destiny  is  irrevocable,  destiny  is  inexorable,  none  can 
withstand  it.  All  are  ruled  by  destiny.  O  Divine  Sage,  be 
favourable  to  me,  who  am  fallen  into  distress  !  Besides  thee, 
there  is  none  in  whom  I  can  take  refuge.  O  Holy  One,  by  thy 
spiritual  energy,  avert  this  evil  fate." 


1  ChantUl* — an  outcest. 

113 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 


CHAPTER    59 

Viskwamitra  seeks  the  help  of  the  sons  of  Vasishtha 
and  Mahodeva  ;  they  refuse  and  are  cursed 

Shm  Vishwamitra  heard  the  appeal  of  the  fallen  sovereign  and 
in  sweet  accents  spoke  words  of  comfort,  saying  :  "  O  King, 
thou  art  welcome,  I  know  thee  to  be  wholly  virtuous,  I  will  be 
thy  refuge,  fear  not.  I  shall  invite  hither  the  learned  and  pious 
brahmans  who  will  assist  thee  in  the  performance  of  thy  sacrifice. 
This  thou  shalt  accomplish  and  obtain  heaven  in  the  form 
imposed  on  thee  by  thy  Guru.  O  King}  having  taken  refuge 
in  me,  consider  thy  purpose  already  accomplished." 

Having  uttered  these  words,  Shri  Vishwamitra  commanded 
his  sons  to  prepare  all  things  for  the  sacrifice.  Summoning 
his  disciples,  he  said  to  them :  "  Bring  hither  the  pious  and 
learned  brahmins  and  the  sons  of  Shri  Vasishtha  also.  May 
they  come  with  their  disciples,  their  friends,  the  learned  and 
the  priests.  If  any  disregard  my  word,  let  it  be  reported  to 
me." 

In  obedience  to  the  sage,  the  disciples  set  out  to  every  quarter, 
summoning  the  sages  and  learned  men  from  many  lands. 
Returning,  they  approached  Vishwamitra,  and  said :  "  O  Lord, 
at  thy  command  the  holy  sages  are  coming  hither,  some  are 
already  come,  Mahodeva  excepted ;  but  the  sons  of  holy 
Vasishtha,  transported  with  rage  uttered  harsh  words  of  which 
we  will  tell  thee."  They  said :  "  How  shall  divine  sages 
partake  of  that  sacrifice  undertaken  by  a  chandala,  at  which 
a  kshatriya  officiates  ?  And  how  shall  those  brahmins,  con- 
strained by  Vishwamitra,  partaking  of  the  food  offered  by  a 
chandala,  enter  heaven  ?  " 

O  Great  Sage,  these  are  the  words  of  the  sons  of  Shri 
Vasishtha. 

.Vishwamitra,  his  eyes  red  with  anger,  answered :  "  Why 
should  the  sons  of  Shri  Vasishtha  disregard  me,  who  am  engaged 
in  severe  ascetic  practices  and  without  guilt  ?  By  my  power, 
these  evil-minded  men  shall  this  day  be  consumed  to  ashes 
and  enter  the  abode  of  death.  By  my  curse  they  shall  become 
114 


BALA  KANDA 
of  those  who  subsist  on  the  dead  for  a  hundred  incarnations. 
They  shall  eat  the  flesh  of  dogs  and  be  called  *  Musthika  \ 
Despised  by  all,  they  shall  wander  about  among  men  and  may 
the  wicked  Mahodeva  also,  having  imputed  blame  to  me,  be 
born  as  a  fowler,  for  a  long  time  becoming  the  pitiless  destroyer 
of  other's  lives  and  by  my  wrath  may  he  sink  to  a  miserable 
and  abject  state." 

Sitting  amid  the  sages,  the  Sage  Vishwamitra  having  pro- 
nounced this  curse,  became  silent. 


CHAPTER    60 

Through  fear  of  Vishwamitra,  the  sages  assist  in  the  sacrifice 
and  King  Trishanku  ascends  to  a  specially  created  heaven 

Having  stricken  the  sons  of  Shri  Vasishtha  by  the  power  of 
his  asceticism,  Vishwamitra,  seated  amidst  the  sages,  spoke  : — 

"  The  renowned  monarch  Trishanku  of  the  dynasty  of 
Ikshwaku,  who  is  both  magnanimous  and  virtuous,  has  taken 
refuge  with  me.  He  is  desirous  of  entering  heaven  in  his 
embodied  state,  it  is  for  me  to  accomplish  it.  O  Sages,  do  you 
unitedly  assist  him  in  this  sacrifice." 

The  sages  hearing  the  words  of  Vishwamitra  and  being 
acquainted  with  the  tradition,  consulted  together  saying :  "  The 
son  of  Kaushika,  the  Risni  Vishwamitra,  is  given  to  wrath.  If 
we  do  not  fulfil  his  desire,  like  a  consuming  fire  he  will  pour  out 
his  curse  upon  us.  Let  us,  therefore,  assist  him  in  the  sacrifice 
so  that  the  king  may  enter  heaven  in  his  physical  body.  Now 
let  us  inaugurate  the  rites." 

Then  the  rites  began,  as  prescribed  by  ancient  tradition, 
Vishwamitra  acting  as  the  chief  priest  and  the  learned  brahmins 
becoming  the  sacrificing  priests  subordinate  to  him.  Observing 
numerous  rituals,  the  sacrifice  continued  for  a  long  time.  Then 
Shri  Vishwamitra  called  thither  the  gods  for  their  share  of  the 
sacrifice,  but  none  of  these  celestial  beings  appeared.  At  this 
"5 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 

the  great  sage  grew  exceedingly  wroth  and  lifting  up  the  sacrificial 
vessel,  said  to  the  King  Trishanku  :  "  O  King,  behold  the  power 
of  my  asceticism  by  virtue  of  which  I  now  send  thee  to  heaven 
in  thy  embodied  state.  O  King,  though  it  is  deemed  impossible 
to  accomplish  this,  by  the  power  acquired  by  me  I  now  say 
to  thee ;  *  ascend  to  heaven  in  thy  physical  form.' " 

Having  uttered  these  words,  King  Trishanku,  in  the  presence 
of  the  sages  instantly  ascended  to  the  heavens. 

Seeing  Trishanku  there,  Indra  and  all  the  other  gods 
exclaimed :  "  O  Trishanku,  thou  hast  no  place  in  heaven. 
Cursed  by  thy  Guru,  O  Stupid  Wretch,  do  thou  fall  headlong 
to  the  earth/' 

Trishanku  accordingly  instantly  began  to  fall  towards  the 
earth  crying  out  to  Shri  Vishwamitra,  "  Protect  me  ",  "  Protect 
me". 

Shri  Vishwamitra,  hearing  the  cry,  grew  angry,  and  called 
out, "  Stay,  Stay  ".  At  that  moment,  standing  amidst  the  sages, 
the  great  rishi  resembled  Prajapati.  Thereafter  he  created  seven 
planets  in  the  southern  quarter  called  the  Seven  Rishis,  and  then 
he  created  the  Ashwini  and  twenty-seven  other  stars.  Seated 
amidst  the  sages,  filled  with  wrath,  Vishwamitra  reflected  in 
himself:  "  I  will  create  another  Indra  or  I  will  leave  this  heaven 
without  an  Indra.  Nay,  I  will  make  Trishanku  Lord  of  this 
heaven,"  and  he  began  to  create  a  new  circle  of  gods. 

Upon  this,  the  sages,  gods  and  celestial  beings,  bewildered 
and  perturbed,  approached  Vishwamitra  and  said  with  humility : 
"  O  Great  Sage,  this  king  has  been  cursed  by  bis  spiritual 
preceptor  and  is  not  worthy  of  heaven." 

Shri  Vishwamitra  answered  them,  saying :  "  Hear,  O  ye  Gods, 
I  have  vowed  that  this  king  should  enter  heaven  in  his  embodied 
state,  this  pledge  must  be  fulfilled.  To  this  end,  I  have  created 
the  Pole  star  and  other  planets  and  this  heaven  will  abide  as  long 
as  the  former  heaven  endures,  as  also  the  gods  created  by  me, 
it  becomes  you,  therefore,  to  confirm  what  I  have 
promised." 

The  gods  in  awe,  having  heard  these  words,  answered  :  "  Be 

it  so,  0  Illustrious  Rishi,  the  heaven  created  by  thee  shall  endure 

beyond  the  Path  of  Vishwanara,  and  let  Trishanku,  suspended 

head  downwards,  remain  as  if  immortal  among  these  shining 

Il6 


BALA    KANDA 

stars.  As  the  stars  attend  on  famous  and  successful  men,  so 
let  these  brilliant  luminaries,  created  by  thee,  attend  on  King 
Trishanku." 

Shri  Vishwamitra,  extolled  by  the  gods,  acquiesced  in  their 
proposal. 

After  this,  O  Rama,  the  gods  and  the  ascetics  who  had 
attended  the  sacrifice,  returned  to  their  own  regions. 


chapter  61 

King  Ambariska's  sacrificial  horse  is  lost  and  he  seeks 
a  human  victim 

O  Rama,  when  Vishwamitra  saw  the  sages  departing,  he  said 
to  the  dwellers  of  the  Tapovana  forest :  "  In  the  southern  region, 
great  obstructions  have  hindered  my  penances,  I  shall  therefore 
go  to  another  quarter  to  perform  austerity.  To  the  west  of 
this  place,  at  the  sacred  spot  named  Pushkara,  there  is  a  large 
and  beautiful  forest  where  I  shall  continue  my  practices  un- 
disturbed." 

Reaching  that  place,  the  great  sage  engaging  in  occult  practices, 
subsisted  on  fruit  and  roots. 

Meanwhile,  King  Ambarisha  of  Ayodhya  inaugurated  the 
horse  sacrifice,  but  the  horse  was  carried  away  by  Indra,  on 
which  the  priest  addressed  the  monarch,  saying :  "  O  King, 
it  is  for  thee  to  protect  the  sacrificial  steed,  the  horse  has  been 
stolen  away  owing  to  thy  negligence,  therefore,  provide  another 
or  seek  a  human  victim,  so  that  the  sacrifice  may  be  accomplished 
without  further  hindrance." 

Hearing  these  words,  the  renowned  monarch  offered  thousands 
of  cows  to  whosoever  should  find  either  a  horse,  or  human  being. 
Seeking  the  sacrificial  beast,  the  illustrious  sovereign  passed 
through  many  countries,  cities  and  forests,  and  entered  hermit- 
ages and  sacred  places. 

At  length,  the  King  Ambarisha  beheld  Richika  the  Sage, 
with  his  sons  and  wife  dwelling  on  the  mountain  Bhrigutunga. 
"7 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMJKI 

Making  obeisance  to  him,  the  king  honoured  him  in  various  ways 
and  enquired  as  to  his  welfare.  He  then  said  to  him  :  "  If  it 
be  agreeable  to  thee,  grant  me  one  of  thy  sons  in  exchange  for 
a  hundred  thousand  cows.  After  searching  many  countries, 
I  have  not  found  either  a  horse  or  a  human  victim  for  the 
sacrifice.  O  Lord,  do  thou,  therefore,  deliver  thy  son  to  me 
and  accede  to  my  request." 

Richika  answered :  "  O  King,  I  will  never  bestow  my  eldest 
son  on  any."  His  wife  then  said :  "  My  Lord  does  not  wish 
to  part  with  the  eldest  son,  but  the  youngest  son  Shunaka  is 
dearest  to  me,  I  shall  not  part  with  him.  O  Great  Muni,  the 
eldest  son  is  beloved  of  his  father  and  the  youngest  is  dear 
to  his  mother,  therefore,  these  two  should  not  be  taken  away." 

O  Rama,  the  middle  son,  whose  name  was  Shunashepha, 
hearing  these  words,  spoke  thus :  "  My  father  does  not  wish 
to  part  with  his  eldest  son,  nor  my  mother  with  her  youngest, 
therefore,  take  me,  O  King." 

O  Rama,  the  king  gave  the  Sage  Richika  a  hundred  thousand 
cows  in  exchange  for  Shunashepha  and,  mounting  his  chariot, 
started  with  him  on  his  homeward  journey. 


CHAPTER     62 

Shunashepha,  the  human  victim,  seeks  and  obtains  help 
from  Vishwamitra 

O  Rama,  the  illustrious  King  Ambarisha,  accompanied  by 
Shunashepha,  having  in  the  afternoon  reached  Pushkara,  rested 
there.  While  the  king  rested,  Shunashepha,  going  to  a  certain 
spot,  beheld  Shri  Vishwamitra,  his  maternal  uncle,  engaged 
with  other  sages  in  the  performance  of  spiritual  practices  and  he, 
sorrowful,  thirsty  and  fatigued,  fell  at  the  feet  of  the  sage,  and 
said :  "  O  Lord,  for  me  there  is  neither  father,  mother,  relative 
nor  caste.  O  Peaceful  Sage,  O  Sovereign  among  ascetics,  1 
take  refuge  in  thee ;  in  the  name  of  dharma,  deliver  me.  Thou 
can'st  protect  the  whole  world,  how  much  more  one  so  insignifi- 
118 


BALA    KANDA 

cant  as  myself.  Do  thou  assist  the  king  in  the  completion  of 
his  sacrifice  that  it  may  be  accomplished  without  hindrance, 
and  may  I  live  and  by  means  of  my  spiritual  practices  obtain 
heaven.  Thou  art  my  master  who  am  masterless.  Protect  me, 
wretched  as  I  am,  as  a  father  protects  his  child." 

Shri  Vishwamitra,  hearing  the  piteous  words  of  Shunashepha 
addressed  his  own  sons,  saying :  "  O  My  Sons,  that  world 
for  which  fathers  beget  their  children  is  at  hand,1  this  child 
is  the  son  of  the  Sage  Richika  and  has  taken  refuge  in  me, 
let  us  protect  his  life.  You  are  all  virtuous  and  charitable, 
let  one  of  you  take  the  place  of  the  sacrificial  victim  at  the 
king's  sacrifice,  and  thus  satisfy  the  God  Agni.  In  this  way, 
we  can  rescue  Shunasnepha.  Assist  me  in  the  completion  of 
the  king's  sacrifice,  propitiate  the  gods,  and  enable  me  to  be 
true  to  my  word." 

Hearing  these  words,  Madhusyanda  and  the  other  sons 
sullenly  replied  to  Vishwamitra,  saying :  "  O  King  of  Kings, 
would'st  thou  abandon  thine  own  sons  and  protect  another's  ? 
Such  an  action  resembles  the  relinquishing  of  a  tasty  dish  to 
partake  of  the  flesh  of  a  dog." 

Hearing  this  reply,  Shri  Vishwamitra  grew  angry  and,  his  eyes 
inflamed  with  wrath,  he  said :  "  Your  speech  is  arrogant  and 
contrary  to  dharma,  it  is  a  violation  of  filial  affection.  I  regard 
you  all  as  insubordinate,  therefore,  I  now  curse  you.  Like  the 
sons  of  Shri  Vasishtha,  may  you  fall  from  your  high  caste  and, 
eating  the  flesh  of  dogs,  wander  about  in  the  world  during  the 
period  of  a  thousand  years  !  " 

Having  thus  cursed  his  sons,  the  muni,  offering  Shunashepha 
his  protection,  thus  instructed  him :  "  O  Son  of  a  Sage,  at 
King  Ambarisha's  sacrifice,  allow  thyself  to  be  bound,  adorned 
with  the  red  garland,  besmeared  with  sandalwood  paste  and  tied 
to  the  sacrificial  post.  I  will  impart  to  thee  two  mantrams, 
which  when  repeated,  will  deliver  thee." 

The  holy  sage  then  carefully  instructed  him  in  the  sacred 
formulas.  Thereafter,  Shunashepha  approached  the  king  and 
said :  "  O  Illustrious  Monarch,  now  enter  upon  the  initiation 
without  delay  and  accomplish  the  performance  of  thy  sacrifice." 

1  The  Hindu  regard  their  heme  of  a  future  existence  to  depend  to  a  great  extent 
cm  their  ions  performing  their  obsequies. 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 

The  king,  filled  with  joy,  went  without  delay  to  the  sacrificial 
pavilion.  With  the  consent  of  the  officiating  priest,  the  king 
now  dressed  Shunashepha  in  red  attire  and  tied  him  to  the  post 
as  the  consecrated  victim.  Being  bound,  Shunashepha  began 
to  praise  Upendra1  by  reciting  the  mantrams  he  had  been  given 
by  Vishwamitra. 

Indra,  pleased  with  the  worship  of  Shunashepha,  bestowed 
the  blessing  of  long  life  on  him. 

O  Rama,  then  did  the  king  complete  his  sacrifice  and  obtain 
the  desired  fruit  from  Indra. 

Thereafter,  the  righteous  Vishwamitra  renewed  his  yogic 
penance  in  Fushkara  and  performed  it  there  for  a  thousand 
years. 


CHAPTER    63 

After  more  austerities  Vishwamitra  is  proclaimed 
a  Maharishi 

Shri  Vishwamitra  passed  a  thousand  years  in  the  practice  of 
mortification,  then  the  gods  came  to  bestow  on  him  the  fruits 
of  his  asceticism.  The  supreme  Brahma  addressed  him  in 
pleasing  accents,  saying :  "  O  Holy  One,  mayest  thou  be 
prosperous,  thou  an  now  become  a  rishi  by  virtue  of  thy  great 
austerities."  Having  said  this,  Shri  Brahma  and  the  other 
celestial  beings  returned  to  their  own  spheres. 

Vishwamitra  again  engaged  in  severe  austerity  and  in  this 
way  passed  many  more  years.  While  thus  employed,  the 
celestial  nymph  Menaka  came  to  bathe  in  the  Pushkara  lake. 
Resembling  lightning  illumining  a  cloud,  her  beauty  stirred 
the  passion  of  Vishwamitra  and  he  said  to  her : — 
"  Be  gracious  to  me  for  I  am  filled  with  a  great  love  for  thee." 
Then  that  beautiful  one  agreed  to  take  up  her  abode  in  the 
hermitage  of  the  rishi.  The  penances  of  Vishwamitra  were  thus 
rendered  void  by  the  presence  of  Menaka  in  the  hermitage. 
O  Rama,  that  nymph  passed  ten  years  in  that  place. 

1  Upendra — a  name  of  Indra. 

120 


BALA    KANDA 

After  this  time,  Shri  Vishwamitra  perceiving  himself  to  have 
been  deluded,  was  filled  with  shame  and  he  reflected  on  the 
cause  of  his  infatuation.  Then  he  adjudged  the  gods  to  have 
devised  this  plan  to  bring  his  ascetism  to  nought  and  he  cried 
out :  "  What,  have  I  passed  ten  years  with  this  woman,  as  it 
were  a  night.  Alas !  My  great  austerities  are  destroyed  by 
this  passion." 

Sighing  heavily  and  filled  with  remorse,  he  beheld  Menaka 
trembling  with  fear,  standing  near,  but  Vishwamitra  addressing 
her  in  reassuring  words,  bade  her  farewell. 

Having  controlled  his  passions,  Shri  Vishwamitra  went  to 
the  northern  mountains  and  began  to  perform  penance  in  the 
Himalayas  on  the  bank  of  the  Kaushiki  river. 

Then,  O  Rama,  the  gods  were  filled  with  fear  by  the  austerities 
practised  by  the  rishi  on  the  Himalayan  mountains,  and  approach- 
ing Shri  Brahma  said : — 

"  O  Grandsire,  now  grant  the  title  of  maharishi  to  Shri 
Vishwamitra." 

Shri  Brahma  then  appeared  before  Vishwamitra  and  in  gentle 
accents  said  to  him :  "  Hail  to  Thee,  O  Rishi,  I  am  pleased 
with  thine  austerity.     I  name  thee  chief  among  the  rishis." 

Then  Vishwamitra,  making  obeisance  to  Shri  Brahma,  spoke 
submissively  saying :  *'  O  Lord,  these  penances  have  been 
undertaken  by  me  that  I  might  become  a  brahmarishi.  Since 
thou  still  namest  me  maharishi,  I  regard  myself  as  not  yet  fully 
self-subdued." 

Shri  Brahma  answered,  saying :  "  So  it  is,  thou  hast  not  yet 
fully  gained  the  mastery  over  thy  senses.  O  Great  Muni, 
undergo  further  penance."  Having  uttered  these  words,  Shri 
Brahma  returned  to  the  celestial  regions. 

Then  Vishwamitra  began  an  exceedingly  severe  penance, 
standing  unsupported  with  his  arms  raised,  living  only  on  air ; 
in  the  summer  season,  standing  in  the  midst  of  five  fires, 
in  the  rainy  season  lying  without  a  canopy,  in  the  winter 
practising  his  spiritual  discipline  in  water,  thus  did  he  pass 
a  thousand  years. 

Perceiving  Vishwamitra  undergoing  these  severe  penances, 
the  gods  were  greatly  perturbed.    At  length  their  lord,  Indra, 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 

approached  the  nymph  Rambha  and  begged  her  to  promote 
his  interest  and  cause  harm  to  Vishwamitra. 


CHAPTER    64 

Indra  is  perturbed  and  sends  Rambha  to  disturb  the  further 
austerities  of  the  Sage 

Indra  thus  addressed  Rambha  saying :  "  O  Rambha,  it  is  for 
thee  to  accomplish  this  great  work  and  stimulate  the  passions 
of  the  great  Sage  Vishwamitra,  so  that  his  spiritual  practices 
may  be  rendered  void.** 

O  Rama,  Rambha,  filled  with  apprehension  on  hearing  the 
words  of  Indra,  said  in  humility :  "  O  Indra,  the  Rishi 
Vishwamitra  is  easily  moved  to  wrath,  he  will  certainly  curse 
me  if  I  approach  him.  I  fear  to  enter  his  presence,  do  not 
therefore  ask  me  to  undertake  this  task." 

To  Rambha,  trembling  with  fear,  standing  with  joined  palms, 
in  token  of  submission,  Indra  made  answer  :  "  O  Rambha,  fear 
not,  accomplish  my  desire,  may  success  attend  thee  ! 

In  the  spring  season,  assuming  the  form  of  a  cuckoo  calling 
sweedy,  accompanied  by  the  god  of  love,  I  will  take  my  place 
on  a  blossoming  tree  not  far  from  thee.  O  Rambha,  attired  in 
beautiful  and  charming  apparel  do  thou  divert  the  mind  of  the 
muni  from  his  spiritual  practices." 

At  the  instance  of  Indra,  that  lovely  nymph  clad  in  enchanting 
raiment,  faintly  smiling,  went  forth  to  allure  the  heart  of  Shri 
Vishwamitra. 

At  that  moment,  the  liquid  notes  of  the  cuckoo  began  to 
delight  the  rishi  and  he  then  beheld  the  nymph  Rambha. 
Stirred  by  the  cuckoo's  note  and  the  ravishing  sound  of  the 
beautiful  Rambha's  song,  Shri  Vishwamitra,  recollecting  his 
former  fall,  was  filled  with  misgiving  and  recognizing  the  design 
of  the  god  Indra,  transported  with  rage,  cursed  Rambha, 
saying:— 

"  O  Rambha,  O  Unfortunate  One,  thou  hast  come  hither 
122 


BALA    KANDA 

to  lure  me  from  my  penance,  I,  who  have  conquered  lust  and 
anger.  Mayest  thou  become  petrified  and  take  the  form  of  a 
rock  for  ten  thousand  years.  A  brahmin  perfected  in  the  power 
of  Yoga  shall  one  day  deliver  thee  from  this  curse." 

Having  pronounced  this  curse  on  Rambha,  the  rishi  became 
a  prey  to  remorse,  for,  giving  way  to  wrath  he  lost  the  fruit 
of  all  his  yogic  practices. 

Rambha  having  been  instantly  turned  to  stone,  Indra  and 
Kama,  perceiving  the  sage  filled  with  wrath,  fled  in  terror. 

Shri  Vishwamitra  having  lost  the  merit  of  his  penances  could 
obtain  no  peace ;  his  passions  remaining  unsubdued,  he  resolved 
to  speak  no  word  to  any  and  never  give  way  to  anger ;  he  said : 
"  For  a  thousand  years,  I  will  not  breathe.  Reducing  my  body 
to  the  last  extremity,  mastering  my  senses,  I  will  obtain 
brahmanhood  by  the  power  of  my  penance.  Measureless  years, 
shall  I  remain  standing,  neither  breathing  nor  eating,  even  should 
my  limbs  become  atrophied." 

O  Rama,  Vishwamitra  resolved  to  perform  this  mortification 
for  the  space  of  a  thousand  years. 


CHAPTER    65 

Vishwamitra  performs  another  thousand  years*  austerities 

and  he  acquires  brahmanhood 

After  this  the  great  Rishi  Vishwamitra,  leaving  the  northern 
quarter,  went  eastward  and  engaged  in  a  most  severe  course 
of  austerities.  Observing  silence  for  a  thousand  years,  he 
performed  incomparable  ascetic  practices,  hardly  able  to  be 
accomplished. 

After  a  thousand  years,  his  form  reduced  to  the  semblance 
of  wood,  the  royal  sage,  under  the  greatest  provocation,  was 
not  incited  to  anger.  O  Rama,  when  Vishwamitra  was  persuaded 
that  he  had  conquered  anger,  his  vow  of  a  thousand  years' 
mortification  being  terminated,  he  sat  down  to  eat. 

At  that  time,  Indra  appeared  in  the  guise  of  a  brahmin  and 
123 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 

requested  the  food  set  before  the  muni,  upon  which  Vishwamitra, 
believing  him  to  be  a  sage,  gave  him  the  whole  which  he  had 
prepared  for  himself  and  still  observing  the  vow  of  silence, 
uttered  no  word. 

'  The  chief  of  the  sages,  suspending  his  breath  for  a  further 
thousand  years,  continued  his  penance,  then  there  issued  from 
his  head  a  smoke  which  terrified  the  beings  of  the  three  worlds. 
By  the  power  of  his  mortification,  the  devas,  gandharvas,  and 
other  beings  were  deprived  of  their  glory  and  lost  conscious- 
ness. 

In  distress,  they  addressed  Shri  Brahma  saying  :  "  O  Lord, 
by  every  means  in  our  power,  we  have  sought  to  distract  the 
great  sage  from  his  penances  and  provoke  him  to  anger,  but  he 
has  persisted  in  his  practices  and  is  free  from  desire  and  aversion. 
If  thou  dost  not  grant  him  brahmanhood,  verily  the  three  worlds 
will  be  destroyed.  None  can  find  rest  anywhere,  the  seas  are 
drying  up  and  the  mountains  are  riven  by  the  power  of  his 
austerities ;  the  sun  is  deprived  of  its  splendour,  the  earth  is 
agitated  and  the  wind  stirs  not.  O  Lord,  we  cannot  move  him 
from  bis  resolve.  On  account  of  this  peril,  men  like  atheists 
have  given  up  the  performance  of  charitable  deeds.  Nowhere 
is  peace  to  be  found.  O  Divine  Being,  lest  the  mighty 
Vishwamitra,  resplendent  as  fire,  determine  to  destroy  the 
universe,  deign  to  grant  him  his  desire.  As  Time,  in  the  form 
of  fire,  at  the  dissolution  of  the  world,  consumes  the  whole 
universe,  so  also  will  the  Sage  Vishwamitra.  Grant  him, 
therefore,  Indrahood,  if  he  so  desire  it,  for  if  Thou  withhold 
brahmanhood  which  he  has  sought  to  acquire,  then  only  the 
sovereignty  of  Indra's  region,  will  content  him." 

Thus  approached,  Shri  Brahma,  accompanied  by  the  gods, 
appeared  before  Shri  Vishwamitra  and  in  pleasing  accents 
addressed  him,  saying :  "  O  Brahmarishi,  reverence  to  thee, 
we  are  pleased  with  thine  austerity.  O  Holy  Vishwamitra,  by 
the  power  of  thy  penance,  thou  hast  acquired  brahmanhood. 
The  gods  bless  thee,  may  prosperity  attend  thee,  may  longevity 
be  thine  1  From  to-day,  thou  art  free,  now  go  where  thou 
pleaseth." 

Offering  salutations  to  Shri  Brahma  and  all  the  gods,  Shri 
Vishwamitra   said:    "Having   bestowed   brahmanhood  and 
124 


BALA    KANDA 

longevity  upon  me,  grant  me  instruction  in  the  holy  syllable 
'ABM'  and  the  Vedas  also,  and  further  invest  me  with  the 
authority  to  officiate  at  the  sacrifice.  O  Ye  Gods,  let  the  son 
of  Brahma,  Shri  Vasishtha,  fully  acquainted  with  the  Vedic 
science,  acknowledge  me  as  a  brahmarishi.  If  this  desire  of 
mine  be  fulfilled,  ye  may  all  depart." 

Thereupon  the  gods  appeared  before  Shri  Vasishtha,  who 
having  acquiesced  in  their  wish  and  sealed  his  friendship  with 
Vishwamitra,  said  to  him :  "  Verily  thou  art  now  a  brahmarishi 
and  as  such  I  acknowledge  thee."  Thereafter  the  gods  returned 
to  their  own  region.  Thus  did  the  illustrious  Sage  Vishwamitra 
acquire  brahmanhood. 

The  divine  sage  then  paid  homage  to  the  great  Vasishtha  and, 
his  purpose  accomplished,  wandered  about  the  earth  engaged  in 
charitable  deeds.  Shri  Shatananda  said  :  "  O  Rama,  this  is  the 
story  of  Shri  Vishwamitra  and  how  he  obtained  brahmanhood. 
O  Raghava,  verily  he  is  the  chief  of  sages  and  the  personification 
of  Yoga.  Constantly  engaged  in  acts  of  virtue,  he  still  performs 
rigorous  penances." 

Having  uttered  these  words,  Shri  Shatananda  became  silent. 

When  this  excellent  sage  had  ended  his  narrative,  King  Janaka 
in  the  presence  of  Rama  and  Lakshmana  humbly  addressed  Shri 
Vishwamitra  saying :  "  O  Chief  of  Sages,  blessed  am  I,  that 
thou  art  come  with  Shri  Rama  and  Lakshmana  to  my  sacrifice. 
O  Muni,  thou  hast,  by  thy  presence,  done  us  great  honour. 
O  Brahmarishi,  thou  hast  added  to  our  renown.  Shri  Rama, 
my  counsellors  and  I  have  heard  the  story  of  thy  wonderful 
austerities  and  also  of  thine  excellent  qualities.  O  Great  Sage, 
immense  is  thy  power,  unimaginable  thy  penances,  incalculable 
thy  virtues,  nor  does  one  ever  tire  of  hearing  of  thy  marvellous 
deeds.  O  Illustrious  Lord,  the  sun  has  set  and  the  time  of 
evening  devotion  is  near,  graciously  grant  us  leave  to  depart ; 
in  the  morning  we  shall  see  thee  again." 

Shri  Vishwamitra  gratified  by  the  king's  words,  praised  him 
and  granted  him  permission  to  depart,  upon  which  King  Janaka 
rose  and  circumambulating  the  great  sage  took  his  departure, 
accompanied  by  his  spiritual  preceptor  and  relatives. 

Honoured  by  the  sages,  the  great  Vishwamitra  with  Shri  Rama 
and  Lakshmana  also  returned  to  his  abode. 
"5 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 


CHAPTER     66 

King  Janaka  relates  the  story  of  the  great  bow  and  the  birth 
o/Sita 

The  day  dawned  peacefully  and  King  Janaka,  having  performed 
his  morning  devotions,  called  for  the  two  princes  and  Vish- 
wamitra.  Having  honoured  the  sage  and  the  two  descendants 
of  the  House  of  Raghu,  he  said :  "  O  Blessed  Lord,  peace  be 
with  thee,  what  service  can  I  render  thee,  I  am  wholly  thine." 

Thus  addressed  by  the  king,  the  Sage  replied :  "  These  two 
princes  are  the  sons  of  King  Dasaratha,  they  are  renowned  in 
the  warrior  caste  and  exalted  throughout  the  earth.  They  desire 
to  see  the  great  bow,  which  is  deposited  with  thee,  be  gracious 
enough  to  permit  them  to  view  it  and  having  thus  accomplished 
their  purpose,  they  will  return  to  their  own  capital." 

Thus  addressed,  King  Janaka  replied  to  the  sage :  "  O  Holy 
Rishi,  hear  from  me  for  what  reason  this  bow  is  deposited  with 
me.  There  was  a  king  named  Devarata  in  the  sixth  generation 
of  the  monarch  Nimi  who  obtained  this  bow  as  a  trust.  In 
ancient  days,  Shri  Mahadeva  at  the  destruction  of  DakshaV 
sacrifice,  lifting  up  his  bow  in  sport  said  to  the  gods  :  '  O  Devas, 
ye  have  failed  to  give  me  my  share  in  the  sacrifice,  therefore, 
by  means  of  this  bow  I  shall  destroy  you  all.' 

"  O  Great  Sage,  the  devas  overwhelmed  with  fear,  making 
supplication  to  the  god,  succeeded  in  propitiating  Shri  Maha- 
deva. Then  he  delivered  the  bow  to  the  gods  and  they  bestowed 
it  on  King  Devarata.    This  is  the  bow. 

"  Thereafter,  while  I  was  ploughing  the  earth  for  a  sacrifice,  a 
virgin  issued  therefrom.  Being  uncovered  by  the  edge  of  the 
plough,  I  named  her  Sita3  and  she  became  my  daughter.  This 
earth-born  virgin  has  grown  up  under  my  protection.  For 
the  marriage  of  my  daughter,  it  was  established  by  me  and 
made  known  to  the  kings  coming  to  seek  her  hand,  that  I  should 
not  bestow  her  on  any  prince  whose  strength  had  not  been 
fully  tried.    O  Renowned  Sage,  these  kings  have  come  to  test 

1  Daksha — the  father  of  Parvali,  the  ion  of  Brahma,  one  of  the  Prajapstii 
1  Sita — literally  a  furrow. 

126 


BALA    KANDA 

their  prowess  and  I  have  placed  the  bow  before  them  and 
requested  them  to  string  it,  but  none  as  yet  has  been  able  to 
do  so.  Perceiving  them  to  be  deficient  in  strength,  I  have 
refused  to  bestow  my  daughter  on  any  of  them.  These  kings, 
inflamed  with  anger,  considering  their  failure  to  string  the  bow 
had  brought  them  into  disrepute,  surrounded  my  capital,  and 
inflicted  great  hardship  on  my  people.  This  siege  endured  a 
full  year  and  immeasurably  reduced  my  treasury.  Undergoing 
severe  penances,  I  propitiated  the  gods,  who  granted  me  a  large 
army  with  which  I  have  defeated  those  kings  who  have  retreated, 
bereft  of  courage,  yet  still  smarting  under  imagined  injury. 

"  O  Great  Sage,  this  is  that  bow  and  I  will  show  it  to  these 
two  princes.  O  Rishi,  should  Shri  Ramachandra  be  able  to 
string  the  bow,  I  will  give  my  daughter  Sita  to  him  in  marriage." 


chapter   67 

The  illustrious  Rama  breaks  the  bow  and  is  given  the  Princess 
Sita  in  marriage 

Hearing  the  words  of  King  Janaka,  Shri  Vishwamitra  said  :— 

"  O  King,  let  the  bow  be  shown  to  Shri  Rama." 

Then  the  monarch  addressed  his  ministers,  saving :  "  Go, 
bring  the  bow  adorned  with  flowers  and  sandalwood,  hither." 

The  counsellors  commanded  by  Janaka  went  to  the  capital 
and  brought  back  the  bow.  Five  hundred  men,  of  great  strength, 
brought  the  eight-wheeled  cart  on  which  the  bow  was  placed. 
Having  brought  the  chest  fashioned  of  iron  containing  the  bow, 
the  ministers  addressed  their  divine  sovereign,  saying :  "  O 
Chief  of  Men,  here  is  the  bow  worshipped  by  former  kings. 
O  Sovereign  of  Mithila,  it  is  at  thy  disposal." 

Then,  with  palms  joined  in  humility,  King  Janaka  spoke  to 

the  holy  Sage  Vishwamitra  standing  with  Rama  and  Lakshmana : 

"  O  Holy  Lord,  this  is  the  bow  which  has  been  the  object  of 

worship  to  the  kings  of  the  Nimi  dynasty  and  which  the  monarchs 

127  x 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 

of  the  earth  coming  hither  have  sought  to  string.  Even  the  gods 
have  not  been  able  to  raise,  bend  or  string  this  bow.  How, 
therefore,  should  mortals  have  the  power  to  do  so  if  the  gods 
have  failed  ?  O  Great  Rishi,  behold  the  bow,  let  the  two  princes 
examine  it." 

The  righteous  Sage  Vishwamitra,  hearing  the  words  of  the 
king,  said  to  Rama :  "  O  Child,  view  this  divine  bow."  Then 
Shri  Rama,  approaching  the  casket  in  which  the  bow  lay,  opened 
it  and  gazed  upon  it. 

He  said :  "  O  Divine  Lord,  taking  it  in  my  hand  and  raising 
it  up,  I  shall  endeavour  to  string  the  bow."  Then  the  king  and 
the  sage  answered :  "  Be  it  so,"  and  Shri  Ramachandra  with 
a  slight  effort,  seizing  the  centre  of  the  bow,  lifted  it  up  in  the 
presence  of  thousands  of  people  and  without  exertion  drew  it. 
By  the  unparalleled  strength  of  the  illustrious  Rama,  the  bow 
broke  into  two  parts  and  a  sound  resembling  the  fall  of  a 
thunderbolt  rang  forth  cleaving  the  mountains  asunder  and 
causing  the  earth  to  shake,  and  on  this  the  people  on 
every  side  fell  insensible,  save  only  Vishwamitra,  Rama  and 
Lakshmana. 

After  a  while,  the  people  being  somewhat  restored,  and 
the  king's  misgivings  set  at  rest,  he  addressed  the  excellent 
Sage  with  humility,  saying  :  "  O  Blessed  Lord,  I  have  witnessed 
the  unparalleled,  wonderful  and  incontestable  feat  of  Shri 
Ramachandra.  My  daughter,  the  Princess  Sita,  shall  obtain 
Prince  Rama  as  her  lord  and  add  to  the  glory  of  my  dynasty. 
O  Great  Sage,  to-day  my  pledge  to  subject  the  prospective 
wooer  of  my  daughter  to  a  trial  of  strength  has  been  redeemed. 
Now  I  shall  bestow  on  Rama,  Sita,  who  is  dearer  to  me  than 
my  life.  With  thy  permission,  O  Sage,  my  messengers  in  swift 
chariots  shall  drive  in  all  haste  to  Ayodhya  and  respectfully 
relating  this  event  to  King  Dasaratha  invite  him  to  my  capital. 
They  shall  further  inform  him  regarding  the  well-being  of  the 
two  princes  protected  by  thee  and  with  due  honour,  convey 
the  great  king  hither." 

The  Sage  Vishwamitra  acquiescing  to  the  proposal,  the  king 
communicated  the  matter  to  his  messengers  and  entrusting  them 
with  a  personal  missive  to  King  Dasaratha,  sent  them  forth 
on  their  deputation. 

128 


BALA    KANDA 

CHAPTER    68 

King  Janaka  sends  messengers  to  invite  King  Dasaratka 
to  the  capital 

Commanded  by  King  Janaka,  the  messengers  in  swift  chariots, 
passing  three  nights  on  the  way,  their  horses  greatly  fatigued, 
arrived  at  Ayodhya.  Entering  the  gates  of  the  palace,  they 
addressed  the  sentries,  saying  :— 

"  Please  inform  the  king  that  we  have  come  from  King  Janaka 
and  desire  an  audience." 

King  Dasaratha  being  informed,  caused  the  messengers  to  be 
brought  before  him.  Entering  the  royal  palace,  they  beheld 
the  aged  king  who  resembled  a  god.  His  benign  and  gracious 
presence  putting  them  at  their  ease,  they  addressed  him  in  gentle 
and  submissive  accents  saying :  "  0  Illustrious  Sovereign,  the 
Lord  of  the  kingdom  of  Mithila,  the  performer  of  great  sacrifices, 
King  Janaka,  enquires  with  affection  as  to  thy  well-being  and 
also  concerning  the  welfare  of  thy  subjects.  With  the  consent 
of  the  Sage  Vishwamitra  he  sends  you  the  following  good  tidings. 
His  daughter  who  has  been  wooed  by  many  kings  unable  to 
pass  the  requisite  trial  of  strength,  who  have  thereupon  returned 
home  discomfited,  has  been  won  by  thy  highly  fortunate  and 
princely  son.  He,  in  the  company  of  the  Sage  Vishwamitra, 
coming  hither,  broke  the  sacred  bow  in  the  presence  of  a  great 
assembly,  therefore,  King  Janaka  desiring  to  see  his  daughter 
wedded  to  thy  son,  Shri  Ramachandra,  sends  thee  the  following 
message :  "  O  Great  Sovereign  be  gracious  enough  to  visit  my 
kingdom  with  all  speed,  together  with  thy  preceptors,  thy  family 
and  attendants  and  be  united  with  thy  sons.  Accept  the  love 
I  bear  for  thee.  Do  thou  come  hither  and  witness  the  nuptials 
of  thy  children. 

"  O  King,  these  are  the  words  of  King  Janaka  which  we  bring 
to  thee  approved  by  the  Sage  Vishwamitra  and  the  priest  Shri 
Shatananda." 

Having  uttered  these  words,  the  messengers,  overawed  by 
the  sovereign's  presence,  became  silent. 

On  receiving  these  tidings,  King  Dasaratha  full  of  joy,  said 
129 


THE  RAMAYANA  OF  VALMIKI 

to  the  holy  Sage  Vasishtha,  Shri  Vamadeva  and  his  ministers : 
"  Protected  by  Shri  Vishwamitra,  Shri  Ramachandra  and  Prince 
Lakshmana  are  now  in  the  city  of  Mithila.  The  renowned 
Janaka  has  witnessed  the  prowess  of  Shri  Ramachandra  and 
desires  to  give  his  daughter  in  marriage  to  him.  If  this  union 
is  looked  upon  with  favour  by  you,  let  us  start  for  Mithila 
immediately}  so  that  we  may  reach  it  with  all  speed." 

The  sages  and  ministers  there  present,  answered:  "It  is 
well,"  whereupon  the  king,  highly  pleased,  said:  "Let  us 
set  out  to-morrow." 

King  Dasaratha  with  his  counsellors  entertained  King  Janaka's 
messengers  with  great  respect,  and  they  passed  the  night  there 
in  comfort. 


CHAPTER    69 

King  Dasaratha  sets  out  with  Ms  spiritual  preceptor,  relations 
and  ministers 

The  night  being  over,  King  Dasaratha,  glad  in  heart,  accom- 
panied by  his  spiritual  preceptor  and  relations,  summoned  his 
chief  minister,  Sumantra,  and  said : — 

"  Let  the  officers  of  the  treasury  take  with  them  wealth  and 
jewels  in  abundance  and  precede  us  in  good  order.  Let  the 
four  divisions  of  my  army  hold  themselves  in  readiness  and 
let  chariots  and  palanquins  be  prepared.  Let  my  commands 
be  carried  out  with  promptitude.  Suffer  Shri  Vasishtha, 
Vamadeva,  Javali,  Kashyapa,  Bhrigu,  Markandeya  and  Katya- 
yana  with  other  learned  and  holy  men  to  lead  the  procession. 
Make  ready  the  royal  chariot,  let  there  be  no  delay,  King  Janaka's 
messengers  are  eager  to  return." 

Then  the  mighty  King  Dasaratha  attended  by  the  holy  sages 
set  out  on  the  journey  followed  by  his  army.  Passing  four 
nights  on  the  road,  they  entered  the  capital  of  King  Janaka, 
who,  having  commanded  the  city  to  be  decorated,  advanced 
to  pay  honour  to  his  royal  guests.  Approaching  the  aged 
130 


BALA    KANDA 

sovereign  Dasaratha,  King  Janaka  was  filled  with  joy,  and 
addressed  him  with  cheerful  words,  saying :  *'  O  Great  King, 
I  bid  thee  welcome,  fortunate  indeed  am  I  that  thou  hast  been 
gracious  enough  to  honour  me  with  thy  presence.  Now  shalt 
thou  have  the  felicity  of  looking  on  thy  two  sons.  Twice  blessed 
am  I  that  Shri  Vasishtha,  attended  by  other  learned  sages,  has 
come  hither  also,  as  it  were  Indra  in  the  midst  of  the  gods. 
Every  impediment  to  the  wedding  ceremony  has  been  withdrawn 
and  this  ancient  dynasty,  by  the  alliance  with  the  House  of  Raghu, 
will  acquire  new  lustre.  O  Illustrious  Sovereign,  to-morrow 
at  the  completion  of  the  sacrifice,  having  consulted  with  the 
sages,  be  gracious  enough  to  celebrate  the  nuptials/* 

The  eloquent  monarch,  Dasaratha,  seated  amidst  the  sages, 
answered :  "  I  have  ever  heard  that  those  who  receive  charity 
are  subject  to  the  conferrer  of  that  charity !  O  Thou  acquainted 
with  virtue,  it  is  ours  to  defer  to  thee  in  all  things." 

Hearing  the  speech  of  the  truthful  sovereign,  King  Dasaratha, 
King  Janaka  was  filled  with  astonishment. 

All  the  sages  then  coming  together,  passed  the  night  in 
converse,  mutually  delighting  each  other. 

King  Dasaratha,  being  united  with  his  sons  was  filled  with 
happiness  and  surrendered  himself  wholly  to  King  Janaka's 
hospitality. 

The  magnanimous  sovereign  of  Mithila,  having  completed 
the  orders  for  the  preparations  of  the  wedding  ceremony,  retired 
to  rest. 


CHAPTER     70 

The  king  with  Vishwandtra  and  the  princes  are  invited  to 

King  Janaka's  court  where  Viskwamitra  relates  the  descent 

of  the  dynasty 

The  following  day,  King  Janaka,  having  carried  out  the  sacrifice 
with  the  assistance  of  the  priests,  said  to  Shri  Shatananda : — 

"  My  younger  brother,  the  virtuous  and  mighty  Kushadwaja, 
resides  in  the  city  of  Sankanshya,  which  is  surrounded  by  a  moat 
131 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 

and  battlements,  mounted  by  heavy  batteries,  the  river  Ikshu 
flowing  at  its  side,  and  resembles  the  aerial  chariot  Pushpaka.  I 
desire  to  see  that  Excellent  One,  who,  with  liberality,  has  assisted 
me  in  the  act  of  sacrifice ;  it  is  meet  that  he  should  attend 
the  marriage  ceremony." 

Having  spoken  thus  to  Shri  Shatananda,  certain  attendants 
standing  near,  were  commanded  by  the  king  to  set  out  thither. 
At  his  command,  the  messengers,  like  gods  riding  out  on  the 
behest  of  Indra,  went  forth  on  swift  horses  to  bring  back  the 
royal  guest. 

Arriving  at  Sankanshya,  and  being  received  by  the  King 
Kushadwaja,  they  acquainted  him  with  King  Janaka's  proposal. 
The  great  king  acquiescing  to  his  request,  came  to  the  capital 
of  the  sovereign  of  Mithila  and  beholding  the  virtuous  great- 
souled  Janaka,  together  with  Shri  Shatananda,  bowed  down  to 
them  in  salutation. 

Having  occupied  a  royal  seat  in  the  assembly,  the  two 
illustrious  brothers  commanded  their  chief  minister,  Sudamana, 
saying :  "  O  Chief  of  Counsellors,  speedily  approach  the  great 
sovereign,  Dasaratha,  of  limitless  glory,  and  bring  that  Excellent 
One  to  my  court,  together  with  the  two  princes  and  his  ministers." 

Sudamana,  going  to  the  encampment  of  King  Dasaratha,  and 
bowing  down  to  him,  said :  "  O  Great  Hero,  O  Lord  of  Ayodhya, 
the  sovereign  of  Mithila  humbly  invites  thee  with  thy  spiritual 
preceptor,  thy  priests  and  thy  two  sons  to  his  assembly." 

Then  King  Dasaratha  attended  by  his  friends  and  kinsmen 
came  to  the  place  where  King  Janaka  sat  amidst  the  sages  and 
ministers.  And  he,  the  wise  and  eloquent  monarch  addressed 
King  Janaka,  saying :  "  O  Great  King,  it  is  known  to  thee  that 
the  chief  priest  of  the  House  of  Ikshwaku  is  Shri  Vasishtha  and 
my  spokesman  in  all  matters.  Therefore,  with  the  approval  of 
Shri  Vishwamitra  he  will  relate  the  descent  of  our  dynasty 
to  thee." 

Having  spoken,  Dasaratha  became  silent  and  Shri  Vasishtha 
then  addressed  King  Janaka  and  Shri  Shatananda  : — 

"  From  Brahman,  the  Unmanifest,  the  Eternal  and  Imperish- 
able Brahma  came  forth.    From  him  was  produced  Maricha, 
Maricha   begot   Kashyapa;    Kashyapa  begot   Surya,    Surya 
132 


BALA    KANDA 

begot  Vivaswat,  and  Vivaswat  begot  Manu.  Manu  was  the 
father  of  Ikswaku  who  was  the  first  king  of  Ayodhya.  The  son 
of  Ikswaku  was  Kukshi  and  his  son  was  Vikukshi ;  the  illustrious 
Vana  was  the  son  of  Vikukshi  and  Vana's  son  was  the  mighty 
Anranya;  his  son  was  Prithu  and  the  son  of  Prithu  was 
Trishanku ;  the  great  Dhundhumara  was  the  son  of  Trishanku 
and  his  son  was  the  hero  Yuvanashwa.  The  renowned  Mand- 
hata  was  born  of  Yuvanashwa  and  Mandhata's  son  was  named 
Susandhi.  Susandhi  had  two  sons  Dhruva-sandhi  and  Prasen- 
ajit.  Bharata  was  the  son  of  Dhruva-sandhi  and  the  renowned 
Asit  was  the  son  of  Bharata.  The  three  sons  of  Asit  were 
Hihasas,  Talajanghas  and  Shashavindus,  great  Kings,  who, 
hostile  to  their  sire,  waged  war  against  him  and  sent  him  into 
exile.  Then  King  Asit,  with  his  two  consorts,  going  to  the 
Himalayas,  there  laid  down  his  life,  leaving  the  queens  pregnant, 
whereat  one  of  them,  to  destroy  the  fruit  of  the  other's  womb, 
gave  her  poison. 

"At  that  time,  a  sage  of  the  family  of  Bhrigu  dwelt  on  the 
heights  of  Himalaya,  by  name  Chyavana  practising  penance 
there.  Then  the  lotus-eyed  Queen  Kalindi,  desirous  of  bearing 
an  excellent  son  approached  the  sage  who  resembled  a  god  and 
bowed  before  him.  The  brahmin  addressed  the  queen  saying : 
'  O  Fortunate  One,  thou  bearest  in  thy  womb,  a  hero,  soon 
to  be  born  together  with  the  poison  ;  have  no  anxiety.' 

"  The  queen,  faithful  to  her  deceased  lord,  overcome  with 
sorrow,  fearing  the  death  of  her  child,  paid  homage  to  the  muni. 
Thereafter  she  bore  a  son,  born  with  the  poison  administered 
by  the  other  wife  and  he  was  named  Sagara. 

"  The  son  of  Sagara  was  Asumanjas,  and  his  son  was 
Anshuman.  The  son  of  Anshuman  was  Dilipa,  and  Dilipa's 
son  was  Bhagiratha.  The  son  of  Bhagiratha  was  Kakustha  and 
bis  son  was  Raghu.  The  son  of  Raghu,  Prabradha  became 
a  demon,  and  was  subsequently  called  Kalamashapada  and  his 
son  was  Shangana.  The  son  of  Shangana  was  Sudarshana,  and 
his  son  was  Agni-varna.  Shighraga  was  the  son  of  Agni-vama 
and  the  son  of  Shighraga  was  Manu.  Manu's  son  was  Prashu- 
shruka  and  his  son  was  Ambarisha.  Ambarisha's  son  was 
named  Nahusha  and  his  son  was  Yayati.  The  son  of  Yayati 
was  Nabhaga. 

*33 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 

"  The  son  of  Nabhaga  was  Aja,  and  the  son  of  Aja  was  King 
Dasaratha ;  the  two  sons  of  King  Dasaratha  are  Rama  and 
Lakshmana. 

"  O  King,  I  have  recounted  the  genealogy  of  King  Ikswaku 
to  thee.  All  these  kings  were  noble,  virtuous  and  distinguished 
in  their  love  of  truth. 

"  King  Dasaratha  requests  the  hands  of  thy  daughters  in 
marriage  for  his  two  sons,  who  are  in  every  way  worthy  to  be 
thy  kinsmen.    O  Chief  of  Men,  bestow  thy  daughters  on  them." 


chapter   71 

King  Janaka  gives  an  account  of  the  succession  and  his  dynasty 

King  Janaka,  paying  homage  to  the  Sage  Vasishtha,  said :  "  O 
Maharishi,  be  peace  with  thee,  hear  the  account  of  the  succession 
of  our  dynasty.  At  the  time  of  bestowing  a  daughter  in 
marriage,  it  is  customary  for  the  father  to  recite  the  pedigree 
of  his  race,  be  gracious  enough  to  hear  me,  O  Lord. 

"  In  ancient  times,  renowned  in  the  three  worlds  was  the 
King  Nimi,  eminent  in  virtue,  a  lover  of  truth  and  foremost 
among  kings  of  that  era.  Nimi  begot  Mithi  whose  son  was 
the  first  Janaka  and  he  begot  Udavasu.  His  sbn  was  Nandi- 
vardhana  and  he  begot  Suketu.  Suketu  begot  the  righteous 
Devarata  and  the  son  of  Devarata  was  the  royal  Sage  Briha- 
dratha.  He  begot  the  great  hero  Mahavirya  whose  son  was 
Dhratiman  and  his  son  was  the  truthful  Sudhriti.  He  begot 
Dhrishta-Ketu  and  his  son  was  the  royal  Sage  Haryashwa. 
Haryashwa  begot  Mam.  Then  followed  Frasidhaka,  Kirtti- 
ratha,  Devamirha,  Bibudha,  Mahidhraka,  Kirtivaja  and  Maha- 
roma.  Maharoma  begot  Swarnaroma  and  bis  son  was  Hraswa- 
roma.  Hraswaroma  had  two  sons  of  whom  I,  myself,  am  the 
elder,  and  this  is  my  younger  brother  Kushadwaja.  My  father, 
bequeathing  the  kingdom  to  me  and  charging  me  with  the  care 
of  Kushadwaja,  retired  to  the  forest.  My  aged  sire,  having 
passed  from  this  world,  I  began  to  rule  according  to  dharma, 
134 


BALA    KANDA 

supporting  my  brother  with  the  utmost  affection.  After  some 
time,  the  King  Sudhanwa  besieged  the  capital  of  Mithila, 
thereafter  he  sent  me  offers  of  peace  on  condition  I  surrendered 
my  daughter,  Sita,  and  also  the  sacred  bow  of  Shiva  to  him. 
O  Brahmarishi,  on  rejecting  his  offer  a  battle  ensued  between 
us  in  which  Sudhanwa  was  slain.  O  Great  Sage,  King  Sud- 
hanwa being  dead,  I  gave  the  kingdom  of  Sankasya  to  my 
well-beloved  brother  Kushadwaja.  This  is  my  well-beloved 
brother.    O  Sages,  we  submit  ourselves  in  love,  to  thee. 

"  O  Raghava,  to  Shri  Ramachandra  I  give  my  daughter  Sita, 
and  Prince  Lakshmana  will  receive  the  Princess  Urmila.  Sita, 
resembling  a  daughter  of  the  gods,  I  bestow  on  Rama ;  verily 
with  my  whole  heart  do  I  yield  these  two  daughters  of  mine 
to  thy  sons.  O  King,  now  be  pleased  to  inaugurate  the 
traditional  distribution  of  kine  in  charity.  Perform  the  Nandi- 
Mukha1  ceremony  so  that  the  nuptials  may  be  celebrated. 

"  To-day  the  Magda  star  is  in  the  ascendant  and  in  three  days 
the  Uttara  Phalguni  will  have  risen ;  the  marriage  should  take 
place  in  that  conjunction. 

"  For  the  purpose  of  ensuring  their  felicity,  let  Rama  and 
Lakshmana  now  distribute  cows,  land,  sesamum  seed  and  other 
requisite  offerings." 


CHAPTER    72 

The  marriage  of  the  four  sons  of  King  Dasaratha  is  arranged 
and  preparations  commence 

King  Jakaka  having  uttered  these  words,  Mahamuni  Vish- 
wamitra,  as  desired  by  Shri  Vasishtha,  said  to  him : — 

"  O  King,  wonderful  indeed  are  the  two  Houses  of  Ikshwaku 
and  Videha,  their  glory  is  limitless,  verily  they  have  no  equal. 
Shri  Rama  and  Sita  are  in  perfect  accord  one  with  the  other, 
as  also  Lakshmana  and  Urmila,  each  equals  the  other  in  grace 
and  heritage.    O  Virtuous  King,  I  have  something  further  to 

1  Nandi-mulcha  ceremony — The  distribution  of  cows  in  charity. 

«35 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIK1 

say,  hear  me.  Thy  younger  brother,  King  Kushadwaja, 
unexcelled  in  virtue,  has  two  daughters  of  incomparable  beauty, 
these  two  I  request  for  the  sagacious  Bharata  and  the  pious 
Shatrughna.  The  four  sons  of  King  Dasaratha  are  youthful, 
handsome,  resembling  the  gods,  equal  to  the  (four)  guardians 
of  the  world.  O  Great  King,  bestow  these  two  damsels  on  the 
younger  sons  of  King  Dasaratha.  Thou  art  unequalled  in  virtue 
and  the  House  of  Ikswaku  is  without  a  peer." 

Hearing  the  magnanimous  words  of  Shri  Vishwamitra  echoed 
by  Shri  Vasishtha,  King  Janaka  with  joined  palms  humbly 
addressed  the  two  august  sages  :— 

"  O  Holy  Ones,  I  am  proud  that  you  have  approved  the 
alliance  of  my  House  with  the  House  of  Ikshwaku.  Your 
commands  shall  be  accomplished.  The  daughters  of  King 
Kushadwaja  shall  be  given  to  the  Princes  Bharata  and  Shatrughna 
in  marriage.  Let  the  four  great  sons  of  King  Dasaratha  be 
united  with  the  four  princesses  on  the  same  day.  O  Divine 
Sage,  to-morrow  the  constellation  Phalguni  presided  over  by 
the  deity  Bhag'  is  in  the  ascendant.  The  wise  consider  this 
season  as  auspicious  for  the  nuptials." 

Shri  Vasishtha  answering  "  Be  it  so  ",  King  Janaka,  in  great 
humility,  addressed  the  holy  sages,  saying :  "  O  Spiritual  Kings, 
it  is  by  your  favour  that  I  am  able  to  offer  my  daughters  in 
marriage.  Regard  me  as  your  servant.  Ye  are  worthy  of  these 
seats  prepared  for  you.  Let  my  kingdom  now  belong  to  the 
King  Dasaratha  and  my  affections  extend  to  the  kingdom  of 
Ayodhya.  I  have  spoken  truth.  O  Holy  Ones,  do  what  is 
considered  necessary." 

King  Dasaratha  hearing  with  attention  the  words  uttered  by 
King  Janaka  was  pleased  and  replied,  saying :  "  O  Brothers, 
possessing  innumerable  excellent  qualities,  ye  have  honoured 
the  holy  rishis  and  kings  with  abundant  hospitality.  May  you 
be  blessed  !  May  happiness  be  yours !  With  your  leave  I  shall 
now  withdraw  to  my  own  apartments  to  inaugurate  the  prelim- 
inary rites." 

Having  taken  leave  of  the  King  of  Mithila,  Shri  Dasaratha, 
preceded  by  the  holy  sage,  went  away. 

1  Bhag — one  of  the  Adityas  q.v.,  whose  special  season  Uttara  Phalguni  is  con- 
sidered favourable  for  marriages  or  alliances. 

136 


BALA    KANDA 

The  following  day,  having  fulfilled  the  traditional  rites,  King 
Dasaratha  gave  away  innumerable  cows  in  charity.  On  behalf  of 
each  of  his  sons,  he  bestowed  on  the  brahmins  thousands  of  cows 
whose  horns  were  covered  with  gold,  yielding  rich  milk,  together 
with  their  calves.  With  every  cow  the  king  gave  away  a  metal 
milking  vessel.  On  that  day,  four  hundred  thousand  cows 
were  given  away  by  him.  That  mighty  king  holding  his  sons 
supremely  dear,  gave  incalculable  wealth  in  their  name.  King 
Dasaratha,  performing  these  deeds  of  charity,  surrounded  by 
his  sons,  resembled  Brahma  attended  by  the  Regents  of  the  world. 


chapter   73 

The  marriage  ceremonies  are  completed 

On  the  day  on  which  King  Dasaratha  distributed  the  cows  in 
charity,  the  great  hero  Yudhajit,  the  son  of  the  King  Kaikeya 
and  the  maternal  uncle  of  Bharata,  also  came  to  Janaka's 
capital. 

Seeing  King  Dasaratha,  he  made  enquiries  as  to  his  welfare 
and  said :  "  O  King,  the  Lord  of  Kaikeya,  through  affection, 
sends  tidings  of  his  well-being  to  thee,  and  seeks  to  know  if  it  be 
well  with  thy  friends.  O  Great  King,  my  father  desired  to  see 
Prince  Bharata,  and  for  this  purpose  I  went  to  Ayodhya.  There, 
hearing  that  thou  hadst  gone  to  Mithila  with  thy  sons,  for  their 
nuptials,  I  came  hither  in  haste  to  see  the  son  of  my  sister."1 

King  Dasaratha  thereupon  duly  honoured  his  kinsman  who 
spent  the  night  happily  in  company  with  the  princes. 

The  following  day,  rising  early,  King  Dasaratha  performing 
his  customary  devotions,  proceeded  to  the  sacrificial  pavilion, 
escorted  by  the  sages. 

At  an  auspicious  hour  in  the  presence  of  Shri  Vasishtha  and 
other  sages,  Shri  Ramachandra  and  his  brothers  adorned  with 
every  ornament  being  present,  the  preliminary  ceremonies  were 
performed. 

1   =  Bharata  being  the  son  of  Queen  Kaikeyi,  daughter  of  the  King  of  Kaikcyi. 

137 


THE    RAMAYAKA    OF    VALMIKI 

Then  Shri  Vasishtha  addressed  King  Janafca  saying :  "  O 
King,  King  Dasaratha  has  inaugurated  the  preliminary  cere- 
monies, he  now  awaits  thy  pleasure.  The  sacred  rite  is  com- 
pleted when  host  and  guests  come  together.  Be  pleased, 
therefore,  to  perform  the  principal  nuptial  rites." 

King  Janaka  listened  to  the  words  of  the  great-souled  Vasishtha 
and  answered :  "  What  guard  detains  King  Dasaratha  at  the 
gate  ?  Whose  sanction  does  his  royal  majesty  seek  ?  Is  not 
this  his  house  ?  Let  the  king  enter !  O  Chief  of  Sages,  my 
daughters,  in  readiness,  stand  at  the  altar,  bright  as  the  clear 
flame.  I,  standing  near,  await  you  all.  There  is  no  need  for 
delay.  Let  the  king  cause  the  ceremony  to  take  place  without 
further  hindrance." 

Then  King  Dasaratha  with  his  sons  and  the  holy  sages  entered 
the  marriage  pavilion.  Thereafter,  King  Janaka  addressed  Shri 
Vasishtha,  saying :  "  O  Virtuous  Sage,  with  the  other  sages 
perform  the  wedding  ceremony." 

Then  Shri  Vasishtha  ignited  the  sacrificial  fire  in  the  centre 
of  the  pavilion.  Shri  Vishwamitra  and  Shri  Shatananda  standing 
before  him,  sprinkled  the  altar  with  perfume,  and  decorated 
it  with  flowers.  Then  he  set  out  the  golden  vessels  and  the 
sacred  kusha  grass,  filling  many  pots  with  incense  and  arranging 
them  in  the  form  of  a  conchshell.  Dishes  filled  with  parched 
corn  and  rice  were  placed  there,  and  durbha  grass  spread  about, 
the  sacred  formulas  being  pronounced  over  them.  The  holy 
rishis  now  lit  a  fire  pronouncing  the  Vedic  mantrams  and  offered 
oblations  into  it 

Shri  Sita,  adorned  with  jewels,  took  her  seat  by  the  sacred  fire 
opposite  Shri  Ramachandra.  King  Janaka,  addressing  the  Son 
of  Raghu,  said  :  "  O  Rama,  from  to-day  my  daughter  Sita  will 
be  thy  companion  in  virtue.  Accept  her,  O  Prince,  and  take 
her  hand  in  thine.  This  fortunate  princess,  faithful  and  tender, 
will  constantly  attend  thee,  following  thee  like  a  shadow,  in 
loving  obedience.    May  you  both  be  happy." 

Saying  this,  King  Janaka  sprinkled  on  them  water  purified 
by  mantrams.    Then  all  the  gods  cried, "  Jai  1  Jai !  M1  and  divine 
music  sounded,  while  a  shower  of  flowers  fell  from  the  skies. 
Thus  was  Sita  joined  in  marriage  to  Shri  Ramachandra. 

i  Jai  t  Jai  !— literally  Victory  1  Victory  ! 
138 


BALA    KANDA 

Then  King  Janaka  said  to  Shri  Lakshmana :  '*  O  Lakshmana, 
come  hither,  peace  be  with  thee  I  Take  in  thy  hand  the  hand 
of  my  daughter  Urmila,  terry  not,  O  Prince." 

Having  thus  spoken,  Janaka  likewise  addressed  Prince 
Bharata,  saying :  "  O  Son  of  Raghu,  accept  the  hand  of  the 
Princess  Mandavi "  and  to  Prince  Shatrughna,  he  said :  "  O 
Great  Prince,  accept  the  hand  of  Shruta-kirtti.  O  Princes  of 
the  House  of  Raghu,  be  gentle  and  faithful  to  your  wives  as 
they  will  be  to  you,  receive  them  now,  let  there  be  no  delay." 

Thus  instructed  by  King  Janaka,  the  four  princes,  taking  the 
hands  of  the  four  princesses  as  directed  by  the  Sage  Vasishtha, 
circumambulated  the  fire,  King  Janaka  and  the  sages  performing 
the  rites  as  ordained  by  the  sacred  ordinance. 

As  the  nuptial  ceremony  of  the  four  princes  of  the  House 
of  Raghu  with  the  four  princesses  terminated,  a  rain  of  Sowers 
fell  on  them  from  the  sky.  Divine  music  sounded,  nymphs 
danced  and  the  celestial  singers  broke  into  paeons  of  praise.  All 
these  marvellous  events  marked  the  wedding  of  the  sons  of 
King  Dasaratha  while  the  princes,  circumambulating  the  fire, 
were  united  with  their  brides. 

Thereafter  with  their  wives,  they  returned  to  their  apartments 
and  King  Janaka  with  his  relatives  and  friends,  with  a  joyful  heart 
having  taken  part  in  the  festivities,  also  withdrew. 


chapter   74 

Parasurama  appears  amidst  inauspicious  signs 

The  night  being  past,  the  great  Sage  Vishwamitra  took  leave  of 
King  Dasaratha  and  King  Janaka  and,  blessing  the  princes  and 
their  sire,  departed  for  the  Himalayas  to  meditate  there.  The 
holy  rishi  being  gone,  King  Dasaratha  begged  the  permission 
of  the  Lord  of  Mithila  to  return  to  his  capital.  Bidding  farewell 
to  the  pious  king,  Janaka  escorted  him  for  some  distance  on 
his  way. 
To  the  King  of  Ayodhya,  on  behalf  of  his  daughter,  King 
139 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 

Janaka  gave  a  hundred  thousand  cows,  woollen  cloths,  countless 
silken  robes  and  richly  decorated  elephants,  horses  and  chariots. 
He  also  bestowed  on  him  male  and  female  attendants,  numberless 
golden  coins  with  quantities  of  pearls  and  coral.  All  these  and 
many  other  gifts  King  Janaka  gave  with  a  joyful  mind,  and 
having  taken  leave  of  King  Dasaratha,  returned  to  Mithila, 
whereupon  King  Dasaratha  with  his  illustrious  sons,  preceded 
by  the  sages,  started  on  the  homeward  journey,  accompanied 
by  his  army. 

As  the  sages,  with  Shri  Ramachandra,  advanced  in  company 
with  the  king,  the  screeching  of  strange  and  terrible  birds  was 
heard,  while  frightened  deer  fled  across  their  path. 

Perceiving  these  inauspicious  signs,  the  king  addressed  Shri 
Vasishtha,  saying :  "  O  Holy  Guru,  why  do  the  birds  cry  thus 
ominously,  and  the  deer  traverse  our  path  ?  What  do  these 
omens  portend  ?  My  mind  is  filled  with  anxiety,  O  Divine 
Lord." 

The  Maharishi  Vasishtha,  in  gentle  tones,  replied :  "  O  King, 
the  fearful  crying  of  the  birds  betokens  some  great  danger,  but 
the  crossing  of  the  deer  from  left  to  right  indicates  a  speedy  end 
to  thy  fears." 

While  they  were  yet  speaking,  the  earth  began  to  quake  and 
and  giant  trees  fell  down,  darkness  covered  the  earth  and  clouds 
of  dust  veiled  the  sun,  nor  could  the  cardinal  points  be  discerned. 
In  the  great  dust  storm  that  followed,  the  army  was  overwhelmed 
with  terror  and  all  became  paralysed,  save  Shri  Vasishtha,  King 
Dasaratha  and  the  princes  alone. 

When  the  dust  was  allayed  and  the  army  somewhat  recovered, 
Shri  Vasishtha  beheld  the  son  of  Yamadagni  of  dreadful  aspect. 
With  matted  hair,  Farasurama,  the  humbler  of  the  pride  of  kings 
and  emperors,  drew  near. 

The  appearance  of  the  muni  resembling  the  splendour  of 
Mount  Kailasha  or  the  fires  of  dissolution  at  the  end  of  the 
world-period  was  hardly  to  be  borne  by  human  eyes.  With  his 
battle  axe  on  his  shoulder,  bearing  a  mighty  bow,  brilliant  as 
lightning,  he  appeared  like  Shiva  about  to  strike  down  Tripura.1 

Beholding  Farasurama  resembling  a  blazing  fire,  the  sages 
reflected  among  themselves  and  said :  "  His  father  being  slain, 

1  Tripura — the  name  of  a  demon  slain  by  Shiva, 
140 


BALA    KANDA 

has  Parasurama  come  again  to  destroy  the  warrior  caste  ? " 
Was  not  his  anger  appeased  when  he  formerly  destroyed  the 
whole  warrior  caste  ?  Has  he  come  again  to  take  his  revenge 
on  us  ?  " 

Reflecting  thus,  they  approached  Parasurama  with  traditional 
offerings,  saying :  "  O  Rama,  accept  this  arghya." 

Shri  Parasurama  accepting  the  offering,  then  addressed  Shri 
Rama. 


chapter    75 

He  challenges  Rama  to  combat 

"  O  Rama,  O  Illustrious  Hero,  I  have  heard  of  thy  great  prowess. 
I  have  also  been  acquainted  with  thy  heroic  deed,  the  breaking 
of  the  bow  at  Janakapura,  verily  a  feat  exciting  wonder  and 
surpassing  imagination.  Having  heard  of  thine  achievement, 
I,  taking  this  other  bow,  have  come  hither.  With  this  terrible 
bow  named  Yamadagni,  show  thy  strength,  O  Rama,  and  placing 
an  arrow  in  it,  discharge  it.  Should'st  thou  be  able  to 
accomplish  this,  I  will  engage  in  honourable  combat  with  thee." 

Hearing  these  words,  King  Dasaratha,  became  dejected  and 
humbly  addressed  the  rishi,  saying :  "  O  Holy  Parasurama, 
thou  art  a  great  brahmin  sage,  it  becomes  thee  not  to  show  anger 
to  warriors ;  be  gracious  unto  my  son,  who  is  still  a  child. 
Thou  art  born  in  the  family  of  Bhrigu  and  hast  pledged  thyself 
to  Indra  to  bear  arms  no  more.  Having  given  the  dominion 
of  the  world  to  Kashyapa  and  retired  to  the  Mahendra  mountain 
to  practise  asceticism,  why  hast  thou  now  come  hither  to  destroy 
us  ?    0  Sage,  if  Rama  is  slain,  none  of  us  will  survive." 

The  great  son  of  Jamadagni,  disregarding  the  entreaty  of  King 
Dasaratha,  again  addressed  Rama,  saying :  "  O  Rama,  these 
two  bows  of  exquisite  design,  famed  throughout  the  world, 
exceedingly  powerful,  were  forged  by  Vishwakarma.1  One  of 
them,  wielded  by  Shri  Shiva  in  combat  with  Tripura,  was  broken 
by  thee.    The  other,  held  by  me,  of  inexpressible  power,  was 

'  Vishwakarma — the  architect  of  the  gods. 

141 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 

given  to  Vishnu  by  the  gods  and  is  known  to  give  victory  over 
the  foe  j  it  is  equal  in  moment  to  that  which  thou  hast  broken. 

"  Formerly  the  gods  asked  Brahma  which  of  the  two  excelled 
the  other  and  Shri  Brahma,  acquainted  with  their  intention, 
invoked  a  quarrel  between  Vishnu  and  Mahadeva.  They 
entered  into  combat  one  with  the  other.  By  the  shout  raised 
by  Shri  Vishnu,  Shri  Mahadeva  was  struck  motionless  and 
his  bow  unstrung.  Then  the  gods  and  rishis  came  to  that  place 
and  caused  the  two  gods  to  be  reconciled.  Thereafter  the  gods 
esteemed  the  bow  of  Vishnu  to  be  the  more  powerful  and  Shri 
Shiva  surrendered  his  bow  to  the  King  of  Mithila,  together 
with  all  its  arrows. 

"  This  bow,  belonging  to  Vishnu,  was  given  in  ancient  times 
by  that  god  to  Richika  and  he  gave  it  to  his  son  Jamadagni, 
my  rather.  He  having  renounced  the  bearing  of  weapons, 
retired  to  practise  austerity,  when  the  rash  and  foolish  monarch 
Sahasravaku  slew  him.  Hearing  of  the  cruel  death  of  my  sire, 
I  successively  destroyed  the  warrior  caste,  from  generation 
to  generation,  thus  acquiring  dominion  over  the  earth.  I 
conferred  this  great  dominion  as  a  gift  on  the  Sage  Kashyapa 
at  the  completion  of  a  sacrifice,  and  retired  to  the  Mahendra 
mountain,  cheerfully  observing  the  practice  of  Yoga.     To-day, 

0  Valiant  Prince,  acquainted  with  thy  great  achievement,  I 
have  come  hither  to  behold  thee.  Receive  this  bow,  bestowed 
on  my  ancestors  by  Shri  Vishnu  and  in  the  spirit  of  a  warrior, 
place  an  arrow  on  it.     If  thou  succeed  in  drawing  the  bow, 

1  will  challenge  thee  to  fight." 


CHAPTER    76 

Parasurama  is  vanquished  and  deprived  of  his  glory  and  power 

Hearing  these  words,  Shri  Rama  having  regard  for  the  presence 
of  his  sire,  answered  with  restraint,  saying :  "  O  Parasurama, 
thy  deeds  are  known  to  me,  as  also  the  avenging  of  thy  fathers9 
murderers.  Methinks  thou  dost  deem  me  lacking  in  valour, 
142 


BALA    KANDA 

1}  a  kshatriya,  and  a  descendant  of  the  Solar  race.  O  Rishi, 
witness  my  prowess.*' 

Having  spoken  thus,  Shri  Ramachandra,  incensed,  seized  the 
bow  and  arrows  from  the  rishi's  hands  and  stringing  it,  placed 
an  arrow  on  it.  While  drawing  the  mighty  bow,  the  son  of 
Dasaratha  addressed  the  rishi  with  defiance,  saying :  "  O  Sage, 
thou  art  a  brahmin  and  as  such  do  I  honour  thee ;  thou  art 
further  a  kinsman  of  Shri  Vishwamitra,  therefore  I  shall  not 
slay  thee  with  this  arrow,  but  by  this  shaft  I  will  rob  thee  of 
the  power  of  motion  so  that  thou  shalt  no  longer  be  able  to  travel 
through  space,  or  I  will  banish  thee  from  those  high  regions 
to  which  thou  hast  attained  by  the  practice  of  penance.  Say, 
what  is  thy  desire  ?  This  divine  arrow  of  Vishnu,  possessing 
the  power  of  vanquishing  the  strength  and  pride  of  the  foe, 
may  not  be  restored  by  me  to  the  quiver,  till  it  has  accomplished 
its  great  purpose." 

When  Rama  placed  the  arrow  in  the  sacred  bow,  Brahma, 
with  the  gods,  assembled  to  behold  that  glorious  deed,  followed 
by  the  gandharvas,  apsaras,  yakshas  and  other  beings.  Shri 
Ramachandra,  having  taken  up  the  mighty  bow,  the  three  worlds 
began  to  tremble  and  Parasurama,  bereft  of  his  divine  power, 
stood  aghast.  Deprived  of  his  glory  and  powerless,  Shri 
Parasurama  with  humble  entreaty,  addressed  the  lotus-eyed 
Rama:— 

"  When  the  dominion  of  the  earth  was  given  by  me  to  the 
sage  Kashyapa,  he  said  '  Thou  must  not  inhabit  this  kingdom  '. 
Therefore,  O  Rama,  in  obedience  to  the  sage,  I  do  not  stay 
on  the  earth  by  night.  This  world  is  no  longer  mine,  but 
belongs  to  Kashyapa.  O  Rama,  do  not  deprive  me  of  the  power 
of  movement,  but  allow  me  speedily  to  return  to  the  beautiful 
Mahendra  mountain.  Thou  can'st  deprive  me  of  the  merits 
earned  by  the  practice  of  Yoga.  I  know  Thee  to  be  the 
Imperishable,  Thou  art  verily  Vishnu  Himself,  none  but  Thou 
could'st  wield  this  bow.  O  Son  of  Raghu,  the  gods  have 
assembled  to  behold  Thee ;  Thou  art  pre-eminent  in  combat, 
and  the  conqueror  of  Thine  enemies.  O  Virtuous  Prince,  to  be 
defeated  by  Thee  is  no  ignominy ;  discharge  Thy  matchless 
arrow  and  I  will  return  to  the  Mahendra  mountain." 

143  L 


THE    RAMAYANA    OF    VALMIKI 

Thereupon  Shri  Ramachandra  discharged  the  arrow  and  the 
merit  of  Parasurama  was  rendered  void,  whereupon  he  speedily 
departed  to  the  Mahendra  mountain. 

The  darkness  being  dispelled  and  the  whole  world  once  more 
filled  with  light,  Rama  was  worshipped  by  the  gods  and  rishis, 
and  Shri  Parasurama  having  circumambulated  the  son  of 
Dasaratha,  returned  to  his  own  hermitage. 


CHAPTER    77 

King  Dasaratha  with  his  army,  the  princes  and  their  brides, 
return  to  Ayodhya 

Shri  Parasurama  having  departed,  Shri  Rama  delivered  the  bow 
and  arrows  as  a  trust  to  the  god  Varuna.  Having  offered 
salutations  to  Shri  Vasishtha  and  the  other  sages  he,  seeing  his 
father  filled  with  apprehension,  addressed  him,  saying :  "  Sire, 
Shri  Parasurama  has  now  gone,  do  thou  command  thine  army 
to  proceed  towards  Ayodhya.'* 

King  Dasaratha,  hearing  Rama's  words,  embraced  him  and 
reflected  that  his  son  was  born  to  him  a  second  time.  Then 
summoning  his  army  to  advance,  he  in  a  chariot,  adorned  with 
banners,  to  the  fanfare  of  trumpets  proclaiming  victory,  entered 
Ayodhya. 

The  streets  of  the  city  sprinkled  with  water  and  flowers, 
appeared  beautiful,  and  the  citizens  rejoicing  at  the  return  of 
their  sovereign,  greeted  him  with  shouts  of  welcome. 

Met  by  the  brahmins  inhabiting  the  city,  the  king  with  his 
friends  and  relatives,  followed  by  the  princes  and  their  brides, 
entered  the  royal  palace  which  was  white  as  snow. 

There,  the  kindred  of  the  king  welcomed  him  with  garlands 
and  sandalwood.  The  Queens  Kaushalya,  Sumitra  and  Kaikeyi 
received  the  brides  and  conducted  the  fortunate  Sita,  the 
illustrious  Urmila,  and  the  two  daughters  of  Kushadwaj  to  their 
palace,  with  auspicious  rites.  Arrayed  in  sumptuous  silken 
robes,  and  borne  to  the  temple  to  worship  the  holy  images,  the 
144 


BALA    KANDA 

brides  then  offered  respectful  salutations  to  their  mother-in-laws, 
and  others  worthy  of  honour.  Thereafter,  each  began  to  live 
with  her  lord  in  her  own  palace. 

Shri  Ramachandra  with  the  other  princes,  possessing  the 
knowledge  of  the  use  of  weapons  and  the  science  of  defence, 
passed  the  time  with  their  friends  in  attendance  on  their  aged 
sire. 

After  some  time,  King  Dasaratha  said  to  his  son  Bharata : 
"  O  my  Son,  thy  maternal  uncle,  who  came  for  the  purpose 
of  taking  thee  to  his  home,  still  tarries  in  the  capital,  therefore, 
go  with  him  to  see  thy  grandfather." 

Prince  Bharata  and  Prince  Shatrughna  prepared  to  start  on 
their  journey  and  took  leave  of  their  father  and  their  highly 
compassionate  brother  Rama. 

Bharata  being  gone,  Shri  Rama  and  Lakshmana  ministered 
to  the  aged  king  as  if  he  were  a  god  and  in  his  name  performed 
charitable  deeds  among  the  people  of  the  city. 

Rama  also  ministered  to  his  mother  with  deep  affection,  and 
served  his  Guru  with  single-minded  devotion.  His  noble 
behaviour  gratified  the  king,  the  brahmins,  merchants  and  other 
castes ;  his  sweet  disposition  and  pious  conduct  charmed  the 
people  of  the  capital.  Rama,  wholly  devoted  to  truth  was 
renowned  for  his  virtue,  and  endowed  with  every  excellent 
quality  like  Swayambhu1-Brahma  himself. 

For  a  long  time  did  Shri  Rama  enjoy  a  life  of  content  with 
Sita.  To  him,  she  was  dear  beyond  all  things  and  he 
surrendered  his  whole  heart  to  her.  Love  is  enhanced  by 
beauty,  virtue  and  gentleness,  and  Sita  possessed  all  these  in 
an  equal  degree  with  Rama.  Lovely  as  a  goddess,  Shri  Sita 
was  able  to  discern  the  thoughts  of  her  lord  before  he  expressed 
them.  The  beautiful  Sita  with  Shri  Ramachandra  wholly 
satisfied,  resembled  Lakshmi,  the  consort  of  the  incomparable 
Vishnu. 

1  Swayambhu — the  Imperishable  or  Self-existent,  a  name  of  Brahma,  the 
creator. 
