BOOK II 
AYODHYA KANDA 
CHAPTER X 
King Dasaratha desires to see Prince Rama made regent, 
and summons a council 
THE great souled Bharata affectionately requested the pious 
Shatrughna to accompany him, on the journey to bis maternal 
grandfather. 
Enjoying abundant hospitality and held by their uncle 
Ashwapati in all affection, the two brothers dwelt there happily. 
Satisfied with the love and entertainment bestowed on them, 
they daily remembered their royal sire, the aged monarch, and 
the king also thought of his sons, now in a distant country. 
The four sons of the aged king were as dear to him as his 
own four arms issuing from his body, yet Rama resembling 
Brahma, endowed with every good attribute, was dearest to 
his sire. Shri Rama, the eternal Purusha,1 the Lord Vishnu 
himself, descended on earth on the entreaty of the gods, to 
slay Ravana, the enemy of the whole world. 
The charming Queen Kaushalya, glowing with maternal love 
for her son Ramachandra, resembled Aditi at the birth of Indra. 
Unequalled in beauty, brave and chivalrous, never speaking 
ill of others, Rama inherited the virtues of his illustrious father ; 
of a cheerful disposition, speaking soft words to all, never 
returning a harsh answer when treated with contumely ; when 
injured, pardoning the1 offender and remembering the offence 
no more ; showing gratitude for the least of favours and 
devoting his leisure from affairs of state to seeking the friendship 
of those eminent in wisdom, learning, age and conduct. Wise 
and generous, he was foremost in addressing others, speaking 
with affection ; supremely courageous yet not rendered vain glorious by his own powers ; never uttering falsehood, honouring 
the learned and the aged, showing regard for his people who 
1 Purusha — litcrallv lord of the city of nine gates, i,e. the body — the dweller 
in the body ai the indwelling Lord. 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
were devoted to him ; having overcome wrath ; surpassingly 
compassionate, venerating the brahmins ; showing extreme pity 
for the poor ; well-versed in public and individual responsibili ties, fulfilling his domestic duties, not only to add lustre to the 
dynasty but also to attain an exalted state in the other world. 
Wise in the discharge of his obligations; as a Scion of the House 
of Ikshwaku, proving himself tender and loving to those 
who sought his protection; restraining the evil-doer; ever 
seeking the weal of his subjects ; eschewing frivolous pursuits 
and shallow talk ; neither hearing nor speaking aught against 
dharma ; in debate equal in eloquence to Brihaspati ; free from 
infirmities ; youthful, handsome, having knowledge of time 
and space and being able to divine the contents of a man's heart 
at a single glance ; verily a great sage and for his marvellous 
qualities as dear to the people as life itself. Profoundly learned 
in the science and the philosophy of the Veda, which he had 
studied with his spiritual preceptor, he even excelled his father in 
the art of warfare. The repository of all auspiciousness, virtuous, 
cheerful, truthful and guileless ; having received full instruction 
from the learned brahmins in sacred and secular policy, knowing 
the significance of virtue, material prosperity and enjoyment ; 
of prodigious memory, conversant with worldly wisdom, 
possessing a pleasing disposition, gentle, able to conceal his 
thoughts ; recognizing when to refuse and when to accept 
material gifts ; winning many friends, firm in his devotion to 
his Guru and to God, countenancing no sin ; never uttering a 
bitter word or one which would agitate the hearts of others ; 
energetic, deploring his own faults whilst excusing those of 
others ; a great advocate, grateful, lending support to those 
he held in affection ; in all circumstances true to his word ; 
capable of protecting the interests of his family and friends ; 
knowing how to meet out retribution to the wicked. Acquiring 
wealth by just means, and appreciating how to distribute it with 
discrimination. Proficient in the Veda, following the literary 
and dramatic arts with enthusiasm, endowed with the gift of 
oratory in Sanskrita and his own native tongue ; depending on 
right alone for felicity and prosperity ; prudent, accomplished 
in sport, music and painting ; an incomparable rider whether 
mounted on horse or elephant ; skilled in archery, renowned 
150 
AYODHYA KAHDA 
in the field, forestalling the enemy in attack and knowing how 
to destroy his defences; fired with righteous wrath when 
engaging in combat, so that neither god nor titan could withstand 
him ; speaking nought against any ; free from pride and envy ; 
ever submissive, yet overruled in his resolve by none ; pre eminent among his people; renowned in the three worlds; 
in forbearance resembling the earth, in wisdom equal to Brihas pati, in courage like unto Indra. 
Sinning resplendent like the full moon in the love of his 
people and his sire, worshipped for his excellent qualities, his 
matchless valour and his integrity, the earth desired to make 
him her lord. 
Seeing his illustrious son manifesting these qualities, King 
Dasaratha began to reflect in this wise : " I have become old 
and have ruled a full measure of years. I desire to see Rama 
crowned while I yet live ! " 
This inclination grew in the mind of the king, and he waited 
eagerly for the time when he might resign his throne in favour 
of Rama. He reflected : " Rama, resembling a cloud, raining 
compassion on all ; beloved far beyond myself; in valour equal 
to Yama and Indra, in understanding like Brihaspati, in 
endurance like unto a mountain, exceeding myself in excellent 
attributes ; on him do I desire to confer the dominion of the 
earth ; this will be my heaven." 
Then that great sovereign summoning his ministers communi cated to them his resolve to proclaim Rama, endowed with those 
powers, rare even in a king, and a mine of surpassing virtues, 
as heir-apparent. 
At that tune, inauspicious portents appeared on the earth, 
and in the heavens, and the king, conscious that he had grown 
old, reflected that by bestowing the throne on Rama, he would 
gratify his comely son, and also assuage his own sorrow and 
benefit his people. Filled with affection for his subjects, and 
for their good, he desired to increase their felicity by installing 
Rama as heir-apparent, when the hour was auspicious. 
Summoning the subject princes and the inhabitants of other 
cities and lands with due respect, the aged monarch entertained 
them in his palaces, bestowing on them gifts of various kinds, 
but the sovereign of Kaikeya and the king of Mithila were not 
151 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
informed of the occasion since they would hear of it thereafter. 
Seated in the assembly, the king resembled Prajapati in the 
midst of his subjects. 
The kings of the earth coming together in council. King 
Dasaratha occupying the throne and they taking the places 
prepared for them, reverently faced the royal dais, observing 
the traditions of the court. Surrounded by his feudal lords 
and the elders, the king appeared like Indra sitting among the 
gods. 
CHAPTER 2 
The elders and councillors willingly accept Shri Rama as regent 
In ringing tones, King Dasaratha addressed the leaders of 
the people seated before him, uttering words delighting their 
hearts. 
When the aged monarch began to speak, his words resembled 
the beat of drums, or the crashing of thunder, yet they were 
rilled with great sweetness withal and uttered in the manner of 
a king. He said : " It is well known to you that this vast 
empire was upheld by my predecessors and their fathers before 
them. To promote the prosperity and felicity of the kingdom, 
formerly protected by the Kings of Ikshwaku, I, walking in the 
path trodden by my forbears, have preserved it to the utmost. 
Having passed sixty thousand years under the royal canopy, 
my body has become old and feeble and seeks repose. The 
burdens of state, not able to be sustained by those of uncontrolled 
mind, have I borne, and now am weary. To-day, therefore, 
with the approval of the learned brahmins present here and for 
the good of my people, I desire to surrender the dominion to 
the protection of my eldest son. Possessing every essential 
virtue, Shri Ramachandra, my beloved son, equal to Indra in 
prowess and the conqueror of his foes, excelling in every virtue, 
resembles the moon accompanied by the Pushya1 star. 
1 Pushya — name of the sixth lunar mansion, also a constellation of three start. 
152 
AYODHYA KANDA 
" I desire to install as regent,2 Rama, exalted among men, 
elder brother of Lakshmana, worthy to be your protector. In 
truth, I verily believe that not only the earth, but the three 
worlds will regard him as their lord. Desiring the joy of the 
universe, I shall lay upon him the weight of government and 
thus be freed from anxiety concerning the kingdom. 
" If this seems proper to you, give me your counsel or say 
what should otherwise be done. Though this be my decree, 
yet should you judge aught else to be a better way, then speak 
that I may know of it. The best course is well known to be 
determined after careful deliberation.'* 
Hearing the words of King Dasaratha, the other monarchs 
and elders cried in unison, " Excellent, Excellent ! " Upon this, 
a sound like distant thunder, pleasant to hear, or like the cry 
of peacocks delighting in the storm, arose. Thereafter, the 
purpose of the sovereign being communicated to all, acclamations 
burst forth that shook the foundations of the palace. 
Then the learned brahmins, the ministers, kings and the elders 
of the city assembled for consultation with those who had come 
from afar, and being of one mind, after due deliberation, thus 
addressed the king : — 
" O Mighty Sovereign, thou hast ruled for thousands of years 
and have now become old, do thou, therefore, appoint Rama 
as regent. It is our cherished desire that the glorious Prince 
Rama should be seen by us, riding on an elephant beneath 
the royal canopy.** 
The king, wishing to fathom their true motives, replied with 
candour, saying: "Acting on my suggestion, you have all 
expressed your willingness to see Rama appointed regent, yet 
there is still some uncertainty in my mind ; tell me frankly 
why you desire to see Rama crowned. Have I erred ? Have I 
failed to govern righteously ? " 
Then the elders of the people and the counsellors answered 
the sagacious sovereign Dasaratha in this wise : " O King, thy 
son is endowed with excellent attributes. Hear of the divine 
and amiable qualities of the wise and perfect Ramachandra, 
qualities endearing him to all and pleasing to record. 
1 Regent — Yuvaraja = heir-apparent. 
153 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
" In his love and zeal for truth, he is equal to Indra. Thou, 
O King, art exalted above all in the House of Ikshwaku, yet 
none in the world practises righteousness as does Shri Rama. 
" By his conduct, he has added lustre to virtue and prosperity. 
Diffusing happiness among his people, he resembles the moon 
delighting the earth. In forbearance, he is like the earth, in wisdom 
like Brihaspati, in valour like Indra. With a deep regard for truth, 
free from envy and jealousy, his disposition is excellent. 
" Forgiving every injury, a comforter of the afflicted and the 
distressed, he addresses all with gentleness. Acknowledging 
every favour received in full measure, self-controlled, true to 
his word whatever betide, speaking no ill of others, of candid 
utterance, full of wisdom he ever reveres the aged. 
" Of immeasurable renown, Shri Rama, whose glory and 
splendour constantly increase, who in the science of archery 
is superior even to the gods, asuras and men, who has studied 
all the branches of learning and the Veda, is also unequalled in 
the art of music. The abode of peace and prosperity, ever 
courteous, humble and wise, and who, having received the 
highest instruction from the brahmins, is skilful in expounding 
the meaning of the Veda. 
" When in company with Lakshmana, he goes to the attack, 
storming towns and villages, he never withdraws without wholly 
defeating the enemy. Returning triumphant, he enquires after 
the welfare of his subjects as if they were his own sons, and 
gives special thought to the well-being of women, servants and 
his disciples as a father regards the needs of his family. 
" O Sire, Shri Rama graciously enquires respecting our own 
disciples whether they render us proper service and hospitality 
and further discharge their duties faithfully. 
" He suffers with the afflicted and rejoices like a parent when 
his people hold a festival. That mighty archer, the observer 
of truth, the servant of the aged, who blesses all those who seek 
his protection, is wholly righteous. Performing noble deeds, 
he will not hear or utter words that create discord. Possessing 
a charming brow and large eyes, in this resembling Vishnu 
himself, Rama, by the process of deduction, is able to converse 
with eloquence. By his courage, prowess, self-reliance and 
patience, he has become the delight of his people. 
154 
AYODHYA KANDA 
" Ever ready to serve his subjects, scorning sensual pleasures, 
he is able to rule the three worlds, how much more this tiny 
earth? 
" His joy and anger are never excited without cause. He 
destroys those meriting death, but shows mercy to the innocent. 
" Liberal to those who have found favour with him ; willing 
to suffer in the exercise of self-control ; beloved of his subjects, 
he evokes devotion in every virtuous heart. 
" Brilliant as the moon by reason of his excellent attributes, 
the earth claims him as her lord. 
" O King, thou art fortunate in possessing this great son 
who resembles Kashyapa, the son of Marichi. The people of 
Ayodhya and the citizens of the kingdom of Koshala continually 
pray for Rama's life and well-being. 
" Men, women, the aged and those from far and near, at dawn 
and eventide, unitedly pray to all the gods that Shri Rama may 
ever be attended by prosperity. O Great King, graciously 
accede to our request. O Giver of boons, we beg thee to install 
Shri Rama as regent without delay. Thy son, resembling 
Shri Vishnu himself, is benevolent and generous to all. O King, 
do this with a cheerful mind." 
CHAPTER 3 
The king resolves Shri Rama shall be installed 
To those who with joined palms were making this petition, 
King Dasaratha answered courteously : — 
" To-day, indeed, I am happy and fortunate since the people 
desire my son, Shri Rama, to be proclaimed regent." 
Thus, in the presence of his subjects, the king in gracious 
accents addressed Shri Vasishtha, Vamadeva and other sages : — 
" In this month of Chitra, when the woods are beautiful with 
flowering trees, be pleased, O Holy Ones, to prepare all things 
for the installation of my son as heir-apparent." 
155 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
After the king had spoken, the people applauded, and when 
the shouts of acclamation had died away, the monarch addressed 
the mighty Sage Vasishtha, saying : " O Blessed Lord, it is meet 
that thou shouldest order those things needful for the coronation 
ceremony." 
Then Shri Vasishtha commanded the ministers in attendance 
to provide gold, gems, unguents, garlands of white flowers, 
parched rice, honey and clarified butter in separate vessels, also 
new cloths, chariots, weapons of all kinds, a complete army, 
elephants free from any imperfection, white flags, a white canopy, 
chamaras,1 a hundred vessels of gold shining like fire, bulls 
with gilded horns, lion skins and other requisites. 
Then the Sage Vasishtha commanded them, saying : " Place 
all these in the king's sacred pavilion. Let every gate in the 
capital and the private apartments of the palace be decorated 
with garlands and sandalwood, and let fragrant incense be 
kindled everywhere. 
"O Ye Accomplished Ministers, provide sweet and health giving foods, milks and curds in attractive dishes sufficient to feed 
a hundred thousand brahmins. To-morrow the holy brahmins 
should be respectfully served with butter, curdled milk and 
parched rice, and presented with as much dakshina as will 
preserve them from want for the remainder of their lives. 
" To-morrow, early in the morning, the Peace Chant should 
be recited, therefore, let the holy brahmins be invited and their 
seats prepared. Let banners and arches of flowers be displayed 
everywhere, and the roads sprinkled with water. Let beautifully 
attired singing girls with their attendants wait at the gates of 
the palace ; let food and cooling drinks be provided at all the 
principal crossroads, also gifts of money and ritual objects that 
are considered sacred ; let fruit and flowers be sent separately ; 
let armed warriors clothed in clean raiment and armed with 
scimitars, wait in the courtyard of the king." 
In this manner, Shri Vasishtha and Shri Vamadeva performed 
all that had been required by the king and, everything being carried 
out to their satisfaction, they informed the great monarch accord ingly. Then the illustrious sovereign said to the prime minister 
Sumantra : " Let the accomplished Prince Rama be brought 
1 Chamarai- — Whitki made of yai** tuli. 
I5« 
AYODHYA KANDA 
here with all speed." Acquiescing in the royal command) 
Sumantra brought thither in a royal chariot that great warrior, 
Shri Rama. Surrounded by the rulers of the earth, the east, 
the west, the north and the south, the kings of aryan and 
non-aryan descent and those from the forests and the hills, 
King Dasaratha looked like Indra in the midst of the gods. 
He beheld his son Shri Ramachandra, handsome, valorous, 
of mighty length of arm, fearless, walking like sn intoxicated 
elephant, his countenance resembling the moon, fair to look 
upon, captivating the hearts of all by his virtue and generosity, 
refreshing his subjects as clouds refresh those afflicted with the 
heat. 
The monarch could not gaze sufficiently on his beloved son 
as he, attended by Sumantra who followed him with reverence, 
alighted from his chariot and ascended the steps of the royal palace 
which resembled Mount Kailasha. Approaching the king he 
announced his name and made profound obeisance at his feet. 
Seeing the prince standing respectfully at his side, the king 
embraced him and asked him to occupy the golden throne set 
with jewels and gold. Raghava thus seated looked like the sun 
rising on the Sumeru mountain. The whole assembly was 
illumined by the presence of Shri Rama who resembled the 
moon riding in the autumn sky filled with innumerable stars. 
As a man adorned with many ornaments is overjoyed with 
delight to see his own image reflected in a mirror, so was King 
Dasaratha filled with ineffable delight when beholding the glory 
of his son ; and like Kashyapa addressing Indra, the mighty 
sovereign smilingly spoke to Rama : — 
" O My Son, thou art the offspring of my chief queen and 
do resemble her, thou art exceedingly dear to me, endowed as 
thou art with all the great attributes, thou hast imbued thy people 
with thy noble qualities ; accept therefore the high office of 
regent. Notwithstanding, My Son, that thou art by nature 
endowed with all good qualities and art humble, yet hear while 
I tell thee that which is for thy good. 
" Keep far from thee those evil habits born of love, pleasure 
and anger ; through thy secret service acquaint thyself closely 
with all the happenings of thy kingdom and other domains, 
157 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
as though they took place before thine eyes. Give pleasure to 
thy people by filling the various storehouses and arsenals. O 
Prince, that sovereign who rules his subjects with due regard 
to their happiness causes his friends to rejoice like the gods 
who have drunk the nectar of immortality. Wherefore, O my 
Child, conduct thyself with a mind fully subdued." 
Then, the friends of Rama acquainted Queen Kaushalya of 
the king's resolve and she rewarded the messengers of these 
good tidings with many cows and gems. 
Shri Rama, hearing the king's words, answered : " So be it," 
and, bowing to the great monarch, left the palace in his chariot, 
the people greeting him with joy as he passed by. 
Satisfied with the sovereign's decree, they acclaimed him 
with salutations and returning to their homes worshipped their 
gods, propitiating them so that no impediment should arise in 
the installation of Shri Rama as regent. 
CHAPTER 4 
Shri Rama and Princess Sita prepare for the ceremony 
The citizens having departed, the king again consulted his 
ministers, saying to them : " To-morrow, the Pushya star is 
in the ascendant, I decree, therefore, that the lotus-eyed Rama 
shall then be installed as my successor." 
Dismissing his counsellors, the king, entering the inner 
apartment, commanded Sumantra to bring Rama to him once 
more. In obedience to the command of his royal master, 
Sumantra repaired to the palace of Rama, to bring him thither. 
Rama, hearing the doorkeeper announce the second visit of 
the minister, became anxious and sending for him with all haste 
inquired of him the purport of his coming. Sumantra answered, 
saying : " The king desires to see thee." Shri Rama thereupon 
hastily repaired to the palace of his royal parent. 
King Dasaratha retiring to the private apartment, issued 
instructions that Rama should be brought thither. The prince, 
158 
AYODHYA KANDA 
entering his father's palace, bowed low, with joined palms, from 
a distance, and contemplated his sire. 
The king, raising him up, embraced him and, giving him 
a seat, again addressed him : — 
" O Prince, I have now grown old and have ruled long, 
enjoying all the pleasures of the heart. I have also performed 
hundreds of sacrifices and distributed great quantities of food 
and lavish gifts as alms to the brahmins. O Great One, a son 
such as thou art, is the fruit of much charity and study of the 
Veda. O Most Excellent One, what I desired to give in charity, 
I have given, and I have studied the Veda and offered up many 
sacrifices. My desire for pleasure is past ; I have discharged 
every obligation to the gods, the sages, my ancestors and the 
learned brahmins, nothing remains to be accomplished by me 
but thine installation. O My Son, hear me, it is the will of my 
people that thou become their sovereign; I shall, therefore, 
install thee as my successor. Nevertheless, O Rama, fearful 
dreams have visited me at night, attended by the roar of thunder 
and the falling of meteors, signs betokening opposition. O 
Rama, the star of my birth is surrounded by the sun, Mars 
and Rami ; those versed in divination speak of it as of evil 
augury, that portends either the death of a king or the visitation 
of some grave calamity. O Prince of Raghu, I desire to see 
thee crowned before my senses fail. Verily, the mind of man is 
inconstant. To-day, the astrologers announce that Purnavasu 
is in the ascendant, but to-morrow it will be the Pushya star, 
auspicious to thy coronation. X desire thee, therefore, to be 
proclaimed regent to-morrow. Do thou, from now on, fast 
with thy spouse, passing the night on a bed of kusha grass, 
with a stone for thy pillow. It is the duty of the friends 
surrounding thee to guard thee. In such undertakings many 
obstructions arise. 
" Prince Bharata is in the city of his grandsire, it is my will 
that thou be installed in his absence. Thy brother, Bharata, 
is virtuous, compassionate, master of his senses and obedient 
to thee, yet, O Prince, I know the mind of man to be fickle, 
even the mind of a righteous and devout man may be subject 
to inconstancy. To-morrow, thy coronation shall take place, 
therefore, now return to thy abode." 
159 M 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
King Dasaratha having thus spoken, Shri Rama left for his 
palace. Entering his own abode, anxious to acquaint Janaki 
with the king's proposal and not finding the princess in her 
own apartment, Rama repaired to the palace of his mother. 
There he beheld the Queen Kaushalya, seated in the temple, 
observing the vow of silence and praying for her son's welfare. 
Acquainted with the sovereign's decree, Shri Lakshmana and 
Sumitra were already in the palace of the chief queen, and Sita 
also having been summoned thither was sitting at her side. 
Queen Kaushalya attended by Queen Sumitra, Lakshmana 
and Sita, having heard that Shri Rama would be installed when 
the Pushya star was in the ascendant, was meditating on 
Narayana,1 with closed eyes and controlled breathing. 
Shri Rama, approaching his mother, paid reverence to her 
and joyfully exclaimed : " O Mother, my father has commanded 
me to serve the people and to-morrow I am to take up the 
burden of government. Shri Vasishtha, my preceptor, and 
other sages have ordained that the Princess Sita should, this 
night, fast with me. At dawn, the Princess Sita and I will 
carry out those prayers and rites proper to the occasion." 
Queen Kaushalya, long desirous of this event, with tears of 
joy flowing from her eyes, answered : " O My Beloved Son 
Rama, mayest thou live long and may all thine enemies perish. 
Acquiring the throne, mayest thou bring joy to thy friends, 
relatives and also Queen Sumitra. O Child, surely thou wert 
born under an auspicious star since thou hast won favour with 
thy royal sire by thine excellent attributes. The purpose of my 
devotion and austerity, undertaken to please the lotus-eyed 
Narayana, has been fulfilled to-day inasmuch as thou art about 
to obtain the kingdom of the dynasty of Raghu." 
Shri Rama listening to his mother's words, smilingly addressed 
Shri Lakshmana, he who ever paid honour to his father, and 
said : " O Lakshmana, share with me the government of the 
kingdom, thou art my second self, the dominion is equally thine. 
O Brother, I desire life and a kingdom for thy sake." 
Thereafter, Shri Rama, bowing to the two queens, with 
their permission withdrew with Sita to his own apartment. 
1 Narayana — a name of the Lord, the waters (nara) being His lint centre 
of motion. 
AYODHYA KANDA 
CHAPTER 5 
On Vasishtha's advice they observe a fast 
King Dasaratha, having acquainted his son Rama with the 
knowledge of his approaching regency, now called his spiritual 
preceptor, Shri Vasishtha, and addressed him, saying : " O Sage, 
whose only wealth is austerity, graciously approach Shri Rama 
and cause him to observe a fast with Princess Site in preparation 
for his coronation." 
Shri Vasishtha answering, " Be it so ", went himself to Shri 
Rama's palace. Ascending a chariot drawn by two horses, he 
drove to the palace, and entering by the three gates, approached 
the abode of Raghava, white as a cloud. 
Shri Rama hearing of the arrival of his preceptor, speedily 
went forth to welcome him and oifer him due obeisance. Taking 
him by the hand, he assisted him to alight from the chariot 
and, studying his mood, made enquiries as to his well-being. 
The venerable Vasishtha said : " O Rama, thy royal parent 
is gracious to thee, to-morrow thou shalt be proclaimed ruler 
of the kingdom, do thou observe a fast to-day. To-morrow, 
King Dasaratha will install thee as regent, as Nahusha of old 
made over his kingdom to Yayati." 
Having uttered these words, the knower of truth, the sovereign 
of munis, requested Rama and Sita to observe a fast that night. 
Then Shri Ramachandra respectfully saluted Shri Vasishtha, 
and the royal preceptor accepting his salutation departed for 
his abode. 
Conversing delightfully with his friends, Shri Rama, when 
requested by them, retired to the inner apartments. The palace 
of Raghava was crowded with joyful men and women, and 
resembled a lake rilled with lotuses visited by innumerable birds. 
Leaving the palace, Shri Vasishtha perceived the streets to 
be filled with people. All the roads entering Ayodhya were so 
crowded with spectators eager to witness Shri Rama's coronation 
that none could pass to and fro without difficulty. The 
sound of the multitudes shouting with joy, filling the highways, 
resembled the roaring of the sea. 
161 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALM1KI 
All the streets of the capital were swept and sprinkled with 
water ; on either side, flower garlands were hanging, and every 
house was decorated with Hags and banners. Men and women, 
children and the aged, all anxiously awaiting the dawn, so that 
they might witness the sacred ceremony, looked forward with 
eagerness to the great festival that would promote their happiness. 
The priest Shri Vasishtha, avoiding the crowded streets, at 
length reached the royal palace. Ascending the balcony which 
resembled a white cloud, he greeted the king as Brihaspati pays 
homage to Indra. 
Seeing the sage approaching, the king rose and enquired as 
to what Shri Rama had said. Shri Vasishtha answered, "All 
is prepared ". As the king rose from his throne, the whole 
assembly stood up to honour the venerable sage. 
Having heard his spiritual preceptor's report, the king, 
dismissing the court, withdrew to the inner apartment, as a lion 
enters its cave. Entering those gorgeous and richly ornamented 
apartments equal to one of Indra's palaces, he resembled the 
moon gliding through the heavens. 
CHAPTER 6 
The city of Ayodhya is decorated for the proclamation 
Shri Vasishtha having taken his departure, Shri Ramachandra 
and the large-eyed Sita purified themselves, and mentally adored 
the Lord Narayana. Offering salutations to the vessel containing 
the sacrificial oblation and to propitiate Narayana, Shri Rama 
poured clarified butter into the sacred fire. Thereafter partaking of 
the remainder of the offering and praying for what was auspicious, 
seated on the kusha grass, he meditated on Shri Narayana. 
Observing silence with purified minds, the prince and princess 
slept in the temple. Three hours before the dawn, they rose 
and caused their servants to clean and decorate the palace. 
Then, after listening to the recitation of the dynastic ballads 
causing them great delight, they performed their morning 
162 
AYODHYA KANDA 
devotions and silently repeated the Gayatri. As the sun rose, 
clad in silken garments, they saluted Shri Narayana abiding in 
the golden orb and then instructed the learned brahmins to 
recite the Peace Chant and other prayers. 
The deep and melodious sound of the Peace Chant, recited 
by the brahmins, mingling with the beat of drums, filled the 
capital of Ayodhya. The inhabitants of the city, knowing that 
Rama and Sita were observing a fast and offering devotion to 
the Lord, were filled with joy. 
On the dawning of day, the citizens brought banyan trees, 
setting them up as pillars to adorn the city for the coming 
coronation. The high temples resembling the Himalayan peaks, 
the stately houses, the highways, the crescents and streets, the 
shops filled with merchandise, the mansions where members of 
the royal family dwelt, the public assembly halls and the tall 
trees were all hung with flags of different colours which fluttered 
in the breeze. Here and there, companies of actors and dancers 
gave pleasure to the people by singing sweetly and playing 
melodiously on their instruments. In the market, in the houses, 
at home and abroad, all spoke only of the coming proclamation 
of Shri Rama as ruler. Children playing in front of their homes 
also chattered about this matter. 
In honour of the occasion, the roads were strewn with flowers, 
and rendered fragrant with incense and pleasant odours ; lamps 
were placed here and there lest the royal procession should pass 
through at night. 
Having decorated the city, the inhabitants awaiting the 
proclamation, came together in public assemblies or stood on 
raised tribunes. Praising King Dasaratha, they said : " That 
mighty King Dasaratha of the dynasty of Ikswaku is indeed 
a pious man. Realising he has grown old, he, himself, is 
installing Rama as ruler. How gracious is our king that he is 
placing us under the rule of Shri Ramachandra. May the Lord 
long protect the prince as our ruler. Shri Rama is simple, 
highly learned, devoted to righteousness and affectionate to his 
brothers. Virtuous and wise, Shri Rama loves us as his own 
brethren. May the righteous and sinless King Dasaratha live 
long, by whose grace, we see Rama enthroned to-day." 
Hearing the praises of King Dasaratha by the people, those 
i63 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
living far distant were attracted to the holy ceremony and flocked 
to see the royal procession, rilling the city of Ayodha Puri. 
On the day of the full moon, the tumult of the multitude 
was like the roar of the ocean. People coming from far and near 
to Ayodhya which resembled the city of Amaravati, enhanced 
the beauty of the capital as aquatic creatures add to the beauty 
of the sea. 
chapter 7 
The hunchback maid, Manthara, informs Queen Kaikeyi 
of Shii Rama's coming installation 
At this time, Queen Kaikeyi had a female servant who had 
accompanied her from the abode of her royal parent and was 
ever in attendance on the queen. Her name was Manthara. 
By chance, ascending the balcony of the palace which 
resembled the full moon, she perceived the capital of Ayodhya 
adorned with garlands of lotuses and the principal streets 
sprinkled with water. Flags were fluttering from the tops of 
the tall houses, the roads levelled, and the wide streets crowded 
with people. Holy brahmins carrying auspicious gifts were 
waiting to offer them to Shri Ramachandra ; the temples were 
painted white and strains of musical instruments resounded 
everywhere. Elated by the festivities, joyful crowds were 
singing the Vedic mantras and not only men but elephants, 
horses and cattle demonstrated their joy in their own peculiar 
fashion. Large flags bound with flowers were being carried 
by joyous citizens wandering here and there. 
Manthara was amazed to see these unusual activities and, 
meeting Shri Rama's royal nurse gaily dressed in a white silken 
robe, she enquired of her, saying : " Why is the wealthy Queen 
Kaushalya, mother of Shri Rama, distributing immense riches 
in charity to-day ? Why are the people of the capital so joyous ? 
What is the happy king about to accomplish ? " 
The royal nurse, overcome with joy at that time, told the 
164 
AYODHYA KANDA 
hunchbacked Manthara of Rama's enthronement. She said : 
** To-morrow, at dawn, under the Pushya star, King Dasaratha 
will install the sinless Rama, the subduer of anger, as Yuvaraja." 
The words of the nurse filled the hunchbacked woman with 
jealous wrath. Speedily descending from the high palace which 
resembled Mt. Kailasa, that sinful woman, consumed with 
malice, entered the bedchamber of Queen Kaikeyi and, waking 
her, thus addressed her :— 
" Why art thou sleeping, O Deluded One ? Thou art in 
imminent peril ; art thou blind to future suffering ? O Fair 
One, the good fortune which thou vauntest is about to pass 
away, like a river that is dried up in the summer season." 
Queen Kaikeyi, pained by the bitter words of the sinful 
hunchbacked maid, answered her saying : " O Manthara, is all 
well ? Why do I behold thee with a gloomy mien, what is the 
cause of thy distress ? " 
Hearing the gentle accents of Queen Kaikeyi, Manthara, who 
was full of cunning, assuming a sorrowful mien and feigning 
friendship for the queen, spoke bitterly, " O Devi, a great 
calamity has befallen thee. Hear me ! King Dasaratha is 
about to proclaim Shri Ramachandra as regent. I am immersed 
in the bottomless sea of fear ; I am afflicted with pain and 
sorrow ; I am as if scorched by fire, and for thy good I have 
come hither. O Kaikeyi, thy woes are my woes, thy sorrows 
my sorrows, of this I am certain. Hearken ! Thou art the 
daughter of a great royal House and thou art the favourite of 
King Dasaratha. Why art thou deceived by bis crafty ways ? 
Outwardly, thy husband appears to be a speaker of truth, but, 
inwardly, he is a deceitful man. His speech is fair, but his 
heart is hard. Thy honesty is the cause of thy suffering. 
Prevailing on thee .by specious words, the king visits thee and 
speaks insincere words to thee. By delivering the kingdom to 
Kaushalya's son, he seeks to make her mistress of all. Like 
an affectionate mother, thou hast nourished in thy lap the enemy 
that is called thy lord. Thou resemblest the one who pressed 
a serpent to her bosom deeming it, through illusion, to be her 
infant. As a snake or an enemy harms the one who has spared 
him, so has King Dasaratha to-day dealt with thee and thy son. 
165 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
This sinful) deceitful monarch will destroy thee, thy son and 
thy relatives, who are worthy of happiness, by enthroning Shri 
Ramachandra. O Thou of Deluded Intellect, ever indifferent 
to thine own good, hear me, there is yet time. Whatever thou 
can'st do for thine own advantage perform and thus protect 
thy son and me." 
Hearing the words of Manthara, the beautiful queen rose 
from her couch, like the autumnal moon. Filled with wonder 
and delight, she took from her person a precious ornament and 
presented it to the hunchback woman. 
That lovely one, unequalled in beauty among youthful women, 
said to Manthara : " O Manthara, thou hast brought me joyful 
tidings. Tell me, what I can offer thee in return for these 
pleasing words? I find no difference between Rama and 
Bharata. I am, therefore, fully satisfied if the king installs 
Shri Ramachandra. O Dear One, nothing is more pleasing to 
me than the news of Shri Rama's enthronement. Ask for 
whatever pleases thee, and I will confer it on thee." 
CHAPTER 8 
Manthara persuades the queen that Bharata should be regent 
and Prince Rama banished 
Prompted by disappointment and anger, Manthara, casting the 
jewel away, in disdain, cried : " O Foolish Queen, this is no 
occasion for rejoicing, dost thou know that thou art about to be 
submerged in a sea of sorrow ? I cannot but laugh silently 
at thy folly. Thou rejoicest when there is reason to mourn ! 
I pity thy simplicity, how should a woman rejoice in the 
advancement of the son of her enemy ? Prince Bharata has an 
equal right to the kingdom with Ramachandra. Rama fears 
Prince Bharata and, fearing him, seeks to displace him. Laksh mana, though heir to the throne, is Rama's obedient servant, 
just as Prince Shatrughna is faithful to Bharata. O Beautiful 
One, by birth Bharata has a claim to the throne. Traditionally, 
1 66 
AYODHYA KANDA 
the kingdom should be his. Shri Rama is well-versed in affairs 
of state, and acts promptly in his own interests. Knowing the 
danger threatening Bharata from Rams, I am filled with dread. 
" To-day, Queen Kaushalya is fortunate indeed ; her son 
will be enthroned by the holy brahmins at dawn, when the 
Pushya star is in the ascendant. Thereafter, thou shalt have 
to stand in complete submission like a stone, before Queen 
Kaushalya whose enemies will be subdued. Thus, not only 
thou, but the virtuous Prince Bharata will become a servant 
and dependent on the Queen Kaushalya. The women of Shri 
Rama's household will be filled with joy, but thy daughters in-law, having no status, will suffer great anxiety and sorrow." 
Queen Kaikeyi believing Manthara really to be benevolently 
disposed to her, began to extol the great virtues of Ramachandra, 
saying : " Shri Rama instructed by his holy Guru is truly 
righteous, grateful, truthful and pious ; he, the eldest son of 
the king, assuredly deserves to be made regent. May he live 
long ! He will ever protect his brothers and servants as a father 
protects his children. O Kubija,1 why art thou jealous of Rama's 
coronation ? After a hundred years, Bharata will inherit the 
throne of his illustrious ancestors. Why art thou sad on such 
a joyful occasion, O Manthara ? Shri Ramachandra is as dear 
to me as is Bharata, he serves me with greater zeal even than 
he does Queen Kaushalya. If Shri Rama ascends the throne, 
it is as if Bharata ruled the land ; Shri Rama regards his brother 
as himself." 
Hearing the Queen's words, Manthara intensely provoked, 
sighed deeply and said : " O Stupid One, thou deemest adversity 
to be prosperity, thou art sinking in an ocean of suffering and 
yet dost not perceive it. When Rama becomes king, who will 
succeed him, Prince Bharata or his own son ? Prince Bharata 
will remain without a kingdom forever. 
" O Beautiful Princess, all the sons of the king cannot occupy 
the throne, and if they could, it would bring calamity. Therefore, 
O Kaikeyi, the sovereign confers his throne on the eldest son ; 
yet, if the younger son be endowed with good qualities he may 
succeed ; the kingdom is given to one and one only. When 
Rama becomes king, then thy son like an orphan, deprived 
1 Kubija — hunchback. 
167 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
of all comfort, will be cast forth from the royal dynasty to suffer. 
I have come to tell thee this for thy good and thou dost not 
comprehend it. If thou wert wise, thou wouldst not reward 
me with this jewel on account of the increased prosperity of thy 
rival. Assuredly when Rama assumes the regency, he will 
either banish Prince Bharata or have him put to death. Through 
proximity people acquire affection even for inanimate objects, 
but thou didst send thy son in his childhood to thy father's 
house. 
" Prince Shatrughna has accompanied Bharata ; Lakshmana 
follows Rama as Shatrughna follows Bharata. It is said that 
a tree marked down for felling by the dwellers of the forest is 
preserved by the proximity of the thorny ishika bushes. Thus 
will Lakshmana ever protect Rama, and Rama in return will 
preserve Lakshmana. These two brothers love each other as 
do the Aswins ; this is well known. Rama will, therefore, seek 
to harm Bharata though he will ever protect Lakshmana. I, 
therefore, consider it were best for Bharata to escape to the 
forest. If Rama succeed to bis father's kingdom, how may thy 
welfare and that of thy relatives be assured ? To thee Bharata 
is a child worthy of happiness but to Rama he is a rival. 
When Rama is king, Bharata will not live long. It becomes 
thee, therefore, O Queen, to protect Prince Bharata, as the leader 
of a herd of elephants protects it from the lion's spring. 
Prompted by pride, thou hast in the past slighted Queen 
Kaushalya ; dost thou think she will spare thee when she is 
chief queen ? O Beautiful One, note well when Rama obtains 
the kingdom together with its mountains, seas and valleys, 
then thou and thy son, Prince Bharata, will suffer ignominy. 
Assuredly, when Rama is king, Prince Bharata will be deprived 
of life, therefore, act so that Rama may be exiled to the forest 
and Bharata obtain the kingdom." 
1 68 
AYODHYA KANDA 
CHAPTER 9 
Queen Kaikeyi is resolved upon her evil design 
The face of Queen Kaikeyi flushed with anger, and sighing 
deeply, she said to Manthara : " To-day, I shall indeed banish 
Rama and ensure that Bharata be proclaimed regent. O 
Manthara, how may Bharata become regent, and Rama be 
deprived of the kingdom ? " 
Hearing these words, the sinful Manthara, bent upon the 
complete destruction of Shri Rama, said to the queen : " Hear, 
O Kaikeyi, I will unfold to thee the only course which will lead 
to the coronation of Prince Bharata. O Kaikeyi, hast thou 
forgotten that which thou hast often related to me ? O Lover 
of Poesy, if it be thy desire to hear the tale from my lips, listen 
and then take action." 
Thus addressed, Queen Kaikeyi, rising from her couch, 
replied : " O Manthara, relate by what means Bharata may 
acquire the throne and Shri Rama surfer eclipse." 
Then the wicked Manthara, desirous of doing injury to Rama, 
said : " Formerly when thy husband was engaged in a war 
between the devas and asuras, he supported the cause of Indra. 
He took thee with him and I accompanied thee. O Kaikeyi, 
to the south, in the Dandaka forest, there ruled a king named 
Timidwaja in his capital Bijayanta. He was versed in the magic 
named Shambara, and he was unconquerable by the gods. He 
waged war on Indra and in the great conflict the asuras, at night, 
carried off the wounded from their beds and slew them. King 
Dasaratha fought great battles with these asuras who pierced 
his body many times with their weapons. He, falling un conscious, thou, O Devi, brought him from the battlefield and 
when they still assailed him, didst skilfully preserve him. O 
Beautiful One, then the king, thy lord, well pleased with thee, 
proffered thee two boons, and thou didst answer : * I shall chum 
them when the need arises.' 
" I was not then acquainted with this matter, but thou didst 
later relate it to me. Prompted by my love for thee, I have 
169 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
treasured all this in my memory. Now, demand the cessation 
of preparations for Shri Rama's enthronement. For the first 
boon ask for the proclamation of Bharata as regent, and for 
the second the banishment of Rama for fourteen years. During 
the period of his exile, men will grow to love thy son and his 
rule will be assured. 
" O, Daughter of a Mighty King, entering the chamber of 
wrath, clad in soiled raiment, cast thyself on the bare ground. 
On the entrance of the king, neither look at nor speak to him 
but, rolling on the ground, continue to weep. Doubtless thou 
art very dear to thy lord who, for thy sake, would enter a raging 
fire. The king would never provoke thee nor can he bear to 
see thee weep. He would sacrifice life itself for thy sake. The 
king cannot be indifferent to thy requests. O Indolent One, 
test the power of thy beauty to-day ; but have a care lest the 
king offer thee diamonds, pearls, gold and other gems, and be 
not caught in the snare of greed. 
" O Fortunate One, remind the king of the two boons promised 
to thee on the battlefield ; strive hard for the success of thine 
undertaking. If the king would lift thee up, let him on oath 
renew his promise. Do thou say to him : * O Great King, 
send Rama into exile for fourteen years and make Bharata ruler 
of the kingdom.' 
" Whilst Rama is absent, the rule of Bharata will be established 
and he will reign forever. O Beautiful One, demand the exile 
of Rama, from King Dasaratha, and all will be well with thy son. 
Men will forget their love for Rama and will cease to care for 
him, and Bharata will have no enemy anywhere. When Shri 
Rama returns, the supremacy of Bharata will be firmly estab lished ; ruling with love, he will inspire affection and many 
friends will support him. Therefore, O Queen, questioned by 
the king, fearlessly and firmly demand that the preparations 
for Rama's enthronement be terminated.'' 
Kaikeyi, thus prevailed upon to execute the evil design of 
Manthara and fully prepared to comply with it, followed her 
counsel as a young chicken follows its mother. The beautiful 
queen, aggrieved that the king had not consulted her concerning 
this great event, said : " O Manthara, thou art truly my sincere 
well-wisher ! Of all deformed creatures on earth, thou art the 
170 
AYODHYA KANDA 
wisest. O Kubija, as yet, I fail to comprehend the king's real 
intention. Deformed women are usually sinful and perverse, 
but thou, O Kubija, art unique, resembling a lotus bending to 
the breeze. In spite of thy physical defect, thou art not to be 
despised. It would seem that thy slender waist, bashful of thy 
full rounded bosom, had withdrawn itself. O Manthara, thy 
face is like the full moon, thou art indeed lovely, thy body is 
smooth, thy waist decorated with a girdle, thy thighs are long, 
thy limbs slender. O Manthara, when thou walkest before me, 
clad in a silken sari, reaching to thy ankles, thou art as graceful 
as a swan. 
"Acquainted with every grace and blandishment, thy hump 
protruding like the hub of a wheel is surely filled with wisdom, 
diplomacy and understanding. I, therefore, present thee with"' 
a gold chain to adorn it. 
" O Lovely Woman, when Bharata becomes king and Rama 
goes into exile, I will cover thy hump with beaten gold. When 
I am certain of the success of my undertaking, I will apply 
sandalwood paste to thy hump, and to thy forehead a diadem 
of gold and gems. 
" O Kubija, I will give thee ornaments of pure gold ; thus 
attired and adorned thou shalt be free to live as thou pleaseth. 
Thou shalt put my sister queens to shame and precede them 
with pride. O Thou whose face is incomparably beautiful, thou 
art a rival of the full moon. O Deformed One, many hunch backed women wearing golden ornaments shall attend thee as 
thy handmaids." 
Thus flattered, Manthara reclining on a white couch, glowing 
like an altar Same, spoke : " O Fortunate One, it is useless to 
construct a dam when the water has run away, therefore, enter 
on thine undertaking immediately. Go wait upon the king in 
the chamber of wrath." 
Thus prompted by Kubija, the beautiful-eyed Queen Kaikeyi, 
filled with ambition, entered the chamber of wrath with 
Manthara. There, inspired by the hunchbacked woman, 
casting her pearl necklace of immeasurable value on the ground, 
the queen rolling on the floor, addressed her : " O Kubija, 
either Rama shall go into exile and Bharata obtain the kingdom, 
or King Dasaratha will have news of my death. I shall neither 
171 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
put on ornaments, nor partake of delicious dishes ; if Rama 
is installed, it shall be the end of my life." 
Manthara continued to instruct Kaikeyi in the most cruel 
manner, uttering words hostile to Rama. " Know well, O 
Fortunate One, should Rama become ruler, it will mean endless 
suffering for thee and thy son. Therefore exert thyself to 
overthrow him.*' 
The queen, wounded by the shafts of Manthara's words, 
placing both hands on her heart, replied angrily : " O Kubija, 
either thou shalt bear the news of my death to the king, or Rama 
shall be exiled and Bharata enthroned. If Rama be not exiled, 
then I shall neither sleep on a bed nor wear flowing garments, 
nor apply sandalwood paste nor antimony to my person. 
Except Bharata be enthroned, I shall neither eat nor drink. If 
this is not accomplished, I do not desire to live." 
Having firmly resolved this, casting her ornaments to 
the ground, she, herself, lay down like a fallen kinnari.1 Her 
face veiled in wrath, her body stripped of its garlands and 
jewels, the queen resembled the sky bereft of sun and stars. 
CHAPTER XO 
The king is deeply afflicted at the sight of the weeping queen 
Incited by Manthara, Kaikeyi, like a kinnari, continued to 
roll on the ground as if wounded by a poisoned arrow. The 
artful queen, devising a plan, gradually unfolded her design 
to Manthara. Heaving deep sighs, like a python, Manthara 
was filled with satisfaction, perceiving her favourite, Kaikeyi, 
resolved on her evil course of action. 
Reflecting on the matter, torn with jealousy, the queen, pluck ing out her eyebrows, scattered her shining ornaments on the 
ground adorning it as stars illumine the firmament. Lying thus, 
AYODHYA KANDA 
attired in soiled raiment with her hair dishevelled) she resembled 
a nymph fallen from heaven. 
The king, having given his instructions for the installation 
of Shri Rama, dismissed the court and entered the inner 
apartments of the queens to inform them of the great 
occasion. 
Anxious to impart the good tidings to his beloved consorts, 
the illustrious King Dasaratha entered the inner apartment, 
first going to the beautiful abode of Kaikeyi. As the moon 
sails into a clear sky after eclipse, so did the king enter the 
apartment of Queen Kaikeyi. He passed through the garden 
made beautiful by parrots, peacocks, swans and cranes. Music 
was softly playing, while dwarfed and hunchbacked maids passed 
to and fro. There were leafy bowers and alcoves on whose walls 
were painted beautiful pictures. Everywhere champaka1 and 
asoka2 enhanced the view, whilst other trees were laden with 
blossom and fruit. Altars of ivory, silver and gold with springs 
of water flowing by seats inlaid with precious metals and costly 
jewels, where delicious food and drink was constantly served, 
transformed the palace into paradise itself. 
The king entered the inner apartments, but did not perceive 
the queen on the couch where desire had caused him to seek 
her. Calling loudly and receiving no answer, he grew sad ; 
never before had Kaikeyi missed the time of dalliance, never 
before had the king found the apartment deserted. The monarch 
desiring to know where the queen was, questioned a maidservant, 
who replied with fear and submission : " 0 Sire, she has entered 
the chamber of wrath." 
On hearing these words, the heart of the sovereign was 
exceedingly troubled. Restless and agitated in mind, the king 
bowed with sorrow entered the chamber of wrath and found the 
queen lying on the ground in an unseemly manner. The king 
who, in his old age, loved the young queen as dearly as his 
own life, was deeply afflicted at the sight. That sinless monarch 
beheld the ambitious Kaikeyi lying on the earth like a branch 
torn from a tree, or a nymph thrust forth from heaven. She lay 
like an apsara fallen on the earth when her merit is exhausted, 
" * Champaka — magnolia, Michclia champaka. 
1 Asoka — a tree resembling the coconut. 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
or like a snapped garland, or a doe ensnared by the hunter, 
or like a young elephant wounded by a poisonous arrow. 
Standing over her like an immense tusker, the monarch 
regarded her with affection. Gently caressing her, apprehensive 
yet propelled by desire, the king addressed his lotus-eyed queen : 
" O Devi, I know not why thou art displeased, by whom hast 
thou been insulted. O tell me 1 O Auspicious One, I am 
grieved to see thee lying in the dust, why art thou, ever 
benevolent towards me, lying on the earth ? Thou art as dear 
to me as my own life, why dost thou act as one possessed by 
an evil spirit ? Art thou sick ? If so, I have many eminent 
physicians who can cure thy malady, who being satisfied with 
the gifts and honours bestowed on them, are ready to obey my 
will. In an instant they shall restore thee to health. O 
Beautiful One, tell me the symptoms of thy complaint. Or 
dost thou desire to reward or punish any man ? Do not let 
the charm of thy face be marred by grief. 
" In order to please thee, I will put to death one who does 
not deserve the penalty, or will pardon one who merits death. 
I will reduce a rich man to poverty, or 'cause a pauper to be 
made wealthy. I and all those who belong to me are thy 
obedient servants. I shall never oppose thy will, O Queen. 
If I can please thee even at the cost of my life, thou hast but 
to speak. Well dost thou know how much I love thee, now 
tell me what I may do for thee. 
" I swear to accomplish whatever thou desireth. Know me 
to be monarch of a kingdom on which the sun never sets. The 
lands of Drivira, Sindhu, Souvira, Sourashtra, Dakshinaputha, 
Vanga, Anga, Maghandha, Matsha, Kashi and Koshala together 
with their abundant produce and wealth are ruled by me. If 
thou desirest any of these, tell me. 
" O Frail One, why dost thou cause thyself suffering ? Rise, 
rise, O Dearest, what dost thou fear ? O Kaikeyi, as the sun 
dispels the mist, I will dispel thy fears." 
Thus nattered by the king, Kaikeyi appeared somewhat 
pacified, yet in order to afflict her lord, began to utter bitter 
and harsh words. 
174 
AYODHYA KANDA 
CHAPTER II 
She asks for the two boons promised her by the king 
The queen addressed the great sovereign, Dasaratha, who, 
overcome with desire, was pierced by the shafts of Kama-deva,1 
and said : Neither am I sick nor has any offered me insult. I 
harbour a certain ambition which thou can'st fulfil. If thou art 
willing to accomplish this, then give me thy solemn promise 
and I will make known its purport to thee." 
The resplendent monarch, agitated by desire, raising the head 
of the queen from the ground took her in his arms and answered 
smilingly : " O Fortunate One, dost thou not know that none 
is dearer to me than thou, saving that lion among men, Shri 
Ramachandra. I swear by the invincible Rama, who is even 
dearer to me than thou, that I will fulfil thy ambition. O 
Kaikeyi, I swear by Rama, without seeing whom I cannot live 
one hour, that I will execute thy desire. O Dear One, by my 
oath I have demonstrated to thee the intensity of my love, now 
tell me what thou desirest. Knowing the great love I bear 
for thee, have no fear ; by my meritorious deeds I declare to 
thee, I will grant thee what thou asketh." 
Following the instructions of Manthara, knowing the fulfil ment of her ambition to be at hand and concerned with the 
advancement of Bharata, Kaikeyi spoke harshly. Satisfied with 
the attitude of the king, she, resembling the dreadful god of 
death, addressed him : " O Great King, formerly thou didst 
promise me two boons to which the thirty-three gods were 
witness. O King, moon, sun, ether, the planets, day and night, 
the cardinal points, the universe and those who inhabit it, the 
earth, the gandharvas, the asuras, the spirits and other beings 
are witness to that promise given to me by thee. O Ye Gods, 
listen with attention to the boons which the king, a lover of 
truth, highly resplendent and acquainted with the law of duty, 
grants me." 
The Queen Kaikeyi, praising the king, who was overcome 
by desire and ready to grant any boon, said : " O King, recollect 
1 Kama or Kandarpa— The God of Love. 
175 N 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
how in the war between the gods and asuras, thou didst fall 
wounded like one dead, and I rescued thee by applying the 
appropriate means ? On thy recovery, thou didst promise me 
two boons. O Truthful Monarch, I now eamesdy desire these 
two boons which are in thy power to grant. Shouldst thou, 
despite thy promises given, not fulfil these desires, then I will 
relinquish my life, dishonoured by thee." 
The queen, holding the king's mind subject by her sweet 
words, resembled a hunter who, intending to slay a deer, lays a 
snare for it. Then addressing the king infatuated with passion 
and willing to grant any boon, she said : — 
"ODeva, hear me, I now claim these two boons. Employing 
the preparations made for Rama's installation, let my son 
Bharata be proclaimed regent, this is the first boon. The second 
pledge granted me on the battlefield is now also due to be 
fulfilled. Let Ramachandia be exiled to the forest for fourteen 
years, wearing a dress of bark, with matted locks like a hermit, 
while my son, Prince Bharata, rules without hindrance. This is 
my earnest desire. Let me, this day, behold the exile of Rama. 
O King, Protector of Truth, preserve thy integrity and the 
traditions of thy birth. The rishis declare that the observance 
of truth is the most excellent means of attaining heaven." 
CHAPTER 12 
The king suffers bitterly at the thought of sending 
Prince Rama into exile 
The harsh words of Queen Kaikeyi caused intense suffering 
and agitation to the heart of the king. He began to reflect 
— "Am I seeing a dream by day, is my mind unhinged, am I 
possessed by an evil spirit, is an inauspicious star causing me 
distress or is this disturbance the result of some malady ? " 
Pondering awhile, the king grew calm, but his mind was still 
troubled, and, recollecting the demands of Queen Kaikeyi, he 
176 
AYODHYA KANDA 
again became restless and agitated like a deer in the presence 
of a lioness. Heaving deep sighs, seated on the ground, he 
resembled a highly venomous snake hypnotized by the power 
of a mantram. He cried out in anger, " Woe unto me " and 
fell senseless. 
After a long time, he recovered consciousness, and suffering 
great distress, full of wrath, answered Kaikeyi, while his 
glance seemed as if it would consume her. " O Thou of Evil 
Disposition, O Destroyer of my Dynasty, what harm have Shri 
Ramachandra or I done to thee ? Rama has ever treated thee 
as his own mother. Why hast thou determined thus ? Alas ! 
I brought thee to my house for the destruction of my home. 
I deemed thee to be the daughter of a king and thou hast 
shown thyself to be a venomous serpent. All my people unite 
in praise of Rama. For what fault shall I abandon him ? It 
were possible for me to part with Queen Kaushalya, Sumitra, 
my kingdom, even life itself, but I cannot abandon Shri Rama. 
To behold the heir-apparent causes delight to my heart ; when 
not contemplating him, my mind loses its capacity to act. The 
world may continue to exist without the sun, crops may grow 
without water, but I cannot live even for a little while without 
Shri Ramachandra. 
" Therefore, O Sinful One, give up thine arrogance. See, I 
put my head at thy feet, be gracious to me. Why hast thou 
determined on this cruelty, O Wicked One ? If thou desireth 
to test my love for Prince Bharata, then do so. When thou didst 
say betimes that Rama, my eldest son, was entitled to the 
kingdom on account of his virtues, didst thou utter these words 
in flattery to gratify me or to exact some service of Rama ? 
" The tidings of Rama's installation is causing thee a burning 
discontent. Possessed by an evil spirit, thou art not thyself, 
I wean. O Devi, it is a great calamity that the House of 
Ikshwaku, famed for its probity, should fall into disrepute. 
" Hadst thou not been afflicted by an evil spirit or influenced 
by an inauspicious planet, thou wouldst never have spoken to 
the detriment of others. It is certain that thou art possessed 
by a malignant entity. O Child, thou hast often said that thou 
didst love Shri Ramachandra, even as Bharata himself. O Devi, 
how dost thou dare to seek the banishment of Ramachandra 
177 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
for fourteen years ? How canst thou demand the exile of the 
virtuous and tender Ramachandra for fourteen long years? 
O Thou of beautiful eyes, how canst thou think of sending 
Rama into exile, who ever honours thee ? Rama has paid thee 
greater respect than Bharata. I fail to comprehend how thou 
canst desire his exile. Reflect well, none in the world will offer 
thee greater service, respect and obedience than Rama. 
" Among the thousands of women and maid-servants in my 
private apartments, none ever speaks ill of Rama, and he 
with a pure heart offers protection to every living being, while 
his subjects ever love and obey him. He has won the hearts 
of all beings by protecting the interests of the needy and the 
afflicted. Generosity, faithful service to his preceptor, valour 
in the field of battle, skill in archery, have all contributed to his 
renown. Truth, austerity, friendship, purity, simplicity of life, 
knowledge of philosophy and service of his teacher are well known qualities of Shri Ramachandra. 
" O Devi, Shri Ramachandra ever acting in the highest 
interests of all, equal to the maharishis and the gods in 
enlightenment, must not suffer the ills of exile. Shri Rama has 
never spoken a harsh word to any, how shall I then, at thy 
instigation, give him this pitiless message ? What shall befall 
me bereft of Rama who is endowed with forgiveness, gratitude, 
self-control, renunciation, truth and virtue, and who never 
inflicts pain on any human being ? 
" O Kaikeyi, I have grown old and my end is near. In this 
wretched state I beseech thee to show mercy on me. The earth 
girdled by the sea, and all that is contained therein, shall be 
thine. Why dost thou drive me to the brink of death's dark 
abyss? 
" O Kaikeyi, I touch thy feet in supplication. Protect Shri 
Ramachandra and save me from dishonouring my word." 
King Dasaratha, stricken with grief, fell senseless, his whole 
frame convulsed and agitated. Again and again he entreated 
the queen to take him beyond the sea of suffering, but that 
cruel one growing each instant more adamant, replied : " O 
King, if thou repent of the two boons given to me, none in 
the world will call thee righteous. When other kings question 
thee regarding thy promises, O Righteous One, what will be 
178 
AYODHYA KANDA 
thine answer ? Wilt thou say that she to whom thou owest thy 
life and by whose grace thou yet livest, who rendered thee great 
service at the tune of misfortune and to whom thou didst promise 
two boons, has now been refused these blessings ? 
"Assuredly thou shalt become a stigma on the illustrious 
dynasty of Ikshwaku, having given promises from which thou 
now wouldst fain withdraw. Recollect King Shivya, who 
gave the flesh of his own body, to redeem a pledge, was of thy 
royal house. King Alarfca, likewise of thy dynasty, plucked out 
his eyes that the sight of an aged and learned brahmin might 
be restored, and thus obtained the highest state. Not only man 
is bound by his word, the ocean whose boundaries are fixed, 
does not pass beyond the shore. Therefore, recollecting thy 
pledge, do not relinquish it. O King, art thou bereft of thy 
senses ? Abandoning truth, thou wouldst grant Rama the 
kingdom so that thou mayest enjoy the embraces of Queen 
Kaushalya. Be it in accord with dharma or not, be it truth 
or falsehood, thou must fulfil the promise made to me, it shall 
never be revoked. 
" Shouldst thou withdraw thy pledge and grant Ramachandra 
the kingdom, I will give up my life by drinking deadly poison. 
Were I to see Queen Kaushalya receiving salutations as chief 
queen, I should not be able to endure it. 
" O Great Sovereign, I swear by Bharata and my own life 
that nothing save the exile of Rama shall satisfy me.** 
After speaking these words, Kaikeyi became silent, disregard ing the supplications of the afflicted monarch. Understanding 
the full portent of the harsh words of Kaikeyi, implying Rama's 
exile and the rulership of Bharata, the king remained silent for 
a long time. His senses numbed, he gazed steadfastly at the 
face of his beloved queen, speaking thus bitterly. 
Maharajah Dasaratha, afflicted on hearing the threatening 
speech of Kaikeyi resembling a thunderbolt, inspiring pain and 
grief, knowing she had resolved to banish Rama, cried out : " O 
Rama ! Rama ! " and heaving deep sighs fell to the earth like 
a felled tree. Like a madman bereft of sense or as one in 
delirium or a snake hypnotized by incantations, he fell, deprived 
of his glory. In abject tones, he addressed Kaikeyi, saying : 
" Who has instructed thee in this evil design, cloaked in specious 
179 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
garb ? Art thou not ashamed to address me as one possessed ? 
Formerly, I did not deem thee capable of such conduct ; in 
youth, thy disposition was otherwise. What has overpowered 
thee that thou seekest such a boon ? Stay these unjust words 
that Rama should go to the forest and Bharata occupy the 
throne. O Sinful One, O Cruel-hearted One, O Evil Doer, 
relinquish the insistence on thy resolve, for thine own sake and 
for the sake of thy subjects and thy son. Either Rama or I 
must have offended thee. How have we done so, that thou 
speakest thus ? Assuredly Prince Bharata will never wish to 
occupy the throne while Rama lives. I deem Bharata no less 
virtuous than Ramachandra. When instructing Rama to go to 
the forest, seeing him stricken, how can I look on him ? How 
can I look upon his face darkened like the moon in eclipse ? 
How can I revoke that decision made in consultation with my 
ministers and friends desiring my welfare, causing confusion, 
as the sudden smiting of an army by the enemy. What will 
the kings of other lands say when they hear the breaking 
of my resolve which was reached by common consent ? Will 
they not say : ' King Dasaratha of the House of Ikshwaku is 
like a child. We marvel that he has ruled so long.' When 
the aged, wise and learned brahmins enquire for Rama, shall I 
answer them that, coerced by Kaikeyi, I have sent him into 
exile ? If I say this in truth, it will be accounted falsehood 
since I have already instructed my Guru to install Shri Rama 
as regent. What will his mother, Queen Kaushalya, say, if I 
banish Rama ? How shall I explain this cruel deed to Queen 
Kaushalya? She is ever dutiful, a friend, serving me as a 
handmaid, keeping my secrets as a trusted companion, practising 
virtue like a woman and in attending on my welfare resembling 
a sister, serving me with delicious food like a mother, ever 
speaking sweetly to me, ever desiring my good; her son is 
dearest to me. How can I fail to accord her due respect ? 
Fearing thy displeasure, how great would be my subsequent 
repentance and remorse ? 
"As one partaking of delicious food, really injurious to him, 
is later filled with regret, so knowing Rama exiled at my 
command, the terrified Sumitra will place no further faith in 
me. Oh ! how unfortunate is this, that Sita hearing these evil 
1 80 
AYODHYA KANDA 
tidings of my death and Shii Ramachandra's banishment, will 
yield up her life, as a nymph dies deprived of her mate in a 
Himalayan valley. 
" I shall not long survive the exile of Rama and the grief of 
Sita. Enjoy thou the kingdom with thy son, but as a widow ! 
Know well, O Devi, there is no happiness for me in life if Rama 
is exiled. As men infatuated by the colour of wine, drink 
it thinking ill of it the while and knowing its harmful 
consequences, so did I, charmed by thee, enter into union with 
thee, believing thee true and faithful. Yet now I know thy 
disposition to be incomparably vile. Thou hast deluded me 
with alluring deceits. 
"As a hunter decoys a deer by sweet music, so alas ! will 
the people of the capital think of me, as my son's executioner. 
They will shrink from me as from a brahmin who drinks 
intoxicating liquor. Alas ! that I should hear such bitter 
words. Now I am suffering deep affliction as men who consume 
the fruit of their former iniquities. O Sinful One, having long 
protected thee, it is I who have erred, like the man who carefully 
preserves the rope with which he is eventually hanged. 
"As a child, in a solitary place, plays with a black snake not 
knowing it will be the cause of his death, so am I. Who is 
more wicked than myself, who, during my lifetime causes my 
saintly son to become an orphan ? The whole world will despise 
me saying : * King Dasaratha is overcome by lust and at the 
prompting of a woman has sent his son into exile.' 
" Shri Rama in his childhood abstained from flesh, honey1 
and wine, and faithful to his brahmacharya vow, was reduced 
to a skeleton by the observance of severe austerities, much study 
and the firm service of his preceptor. Now, a householder, 
the time has come that he should enjoy health and prosperity, 
yet now he is condemned to undergo great physical privation. 
It is certain when I command him to go to the forest, he will 
reply * Be it so, O Sire*. Alas! how much better if it could be 
otherwise. My beloved child will assuredly not disobey me. 
Not knowing my true reason, and believing the command to 
spring from the sincerity of my heart, he will acquiesce and 
1 Honey in those days being obtained by killing all die bees, hence Shri Rama 
eschewed tt. 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
willingly depart ; yet all will execrate me if Rama leaves us. 
" Death, who spares none, will take me to the region of Yama 
while Shri Ramachandra has gone to the forest, then O Kaikeyi, 
what grievous injustice wilt thou inflict on thy remaining 
relatives and Queen Kaushalya ? She, deprived of Rama and 
Lakshmana, will no longer be able to endure her grief and will 
yield up her life. 
" O Kaikeyi, having cast me, Kaushalya, Sumitra and my 
three sons into the pit of death, canst thou be happy ? Wilt 
thou be able to protect the dynasty of Ikshwaku, which for 
long ages has been ruled without disturbance, when Rama and 
I are gone ? Will Bharata approve the banishment of Rama, 
if it be so, let him not perform my obsequies. O Enemy, may 
thine ambitions be fulfilled. When I am dead and Rama 
banished, then wilt thou, a widow, govern the kingdom with 
thy son. 
" O Thou dwelling in our midst as the pretended daughter 
of a king, wert thou truly a princess, thine incomparable renown 
would not have been tarnished, nor would I have been set at 
nought by thee. 
" Now my son, accustomed to ride on chariots, horses and 
elephants will have to walk barefoot in the forest. He, who 
formerly was served at table by attendants in jewelled livery, 
each vying with the other, saying: 'My dish is sweeter, O 
Lord,' how shall that Rama henceforth live on the bitter and 
insipid fruits of the forest ? How shall he pass his life depen dent on fruit and roots ? How shall Shri Ramachandra, 
accustomed to costly apparel and a luxurious couch, sleep on the 
bare ground, clothed in the yellow robe of a mendicant ? I 
know not why an evil-minded woman should issue this cruel 
decree that Rama should be exiled and Bharata be installed as 
regent. 
" Woe unto those women seeking material gain, skilful in 
accomplishing their own purpose ! I do not condemn all 
women, but those like the mother of Bharata. O Kaikeyi, 
versed in wrong doing, ever meanly disposed and seeking thine 
own advantage, didst thou enter my house to cause me affliction ? 
What fault hast thou seen in me or in Ramachandra, the friend 
of all the world ? O Kaikeyi, on seeing Rama suffering in the 
182 
AYODHYA KANDA 
forest at thy request, fathers will abandon their sons, faithful 
wives their husbands, and the whole world will condemn 
thee. 
" When I behold Shri Ramachandra adorned and handsome 
as a god, approaching me, my eyes axe delighted ; seeing him 
thus, I am rilled with joy and courage. The affairs of the world 
may continue in the absence of the dawn, and the earth exist 
without rain, evoked by Indra, but none in the capital will enjoy 
happiness beholding Rama going into exile. 
"Alas ! To-day, I am about to perish for long nursing thee 
in my arms, O Kaikeyi, a venomous snake bent on my 
destruction. Thou art my real enemy. Now do thou, Rama 
and Lakshmana perform my funeral ceremonies, then govern 
the kingdom with thy son, Bharata. Destroy my relatives and 
friends, depopulate my towns and country, and live in accord 
with mine enemies, O Thou Cruel Wretch ! Why do thy teeth 
not break into a thousand fragments, seeing thou hast spoken 
improperly before thy lord, and uttered vain boasts. Never did 
my Rama speak an unkind word to thee. He knows not how 
to speak unkindly. Thou chargest Rama with baseness, who 
ever was of gentle speech and who is endowed with every 
excellent quality. 
" O Thou Defamer of the Kingdom of Kaikeya, I shall not 
grant thy request whether thou be angered or sorrowful or 
takest thy life by swallowing poison or dasheth thy head against & 
rock, or even sinkest into the earth. Thou utterest words keen 
as the edge of a razor, deceitful and heartrending, veiling them 
in gentle accents, thy nature is perverse, thou art the destroyer 
of thine own family. Thou hast inflicted bitter agony on me. 
Though charming in looks, thou art a dangerous woman. 
I do not desire to consort with one so surpassingly wicked. 
" What use to speak of love and joy, I cannot live without 
Ramachandra. O Devi, abstain from destroying me. I touch 
thy feet, be gracious to me." 
Finding her heart unmoved by his appeal, King Dasaratha 
like an orphan, fawning and abject, fell unconscious at the feet 
of Kaikeyi as one about to die. 
183 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 13 
Kaikeyi disregards the king's immeasurable distress 
King Dasaratha lying on the ground in utter ignominy, 
resembled King Yayati fallen from heaven. The cruel queen, 
seeing her purpose yet unaccomplished, herself fearless yet 
inspiring terror in the heart of the king, again demanded the 
boons, saying : — 
" O King, thou didst ever deem thyself a man of truth and 
one faithful to his vows, why dost thou then withhold the boons 
promised to me ? " 
After some time, the monarch exceedingly disquieted, replied 
in anger : — 
" O Sinful Woman, after my death when Ramachandra, the 
chief of men, has gone into exile, thou mayest accomplish thy 
purpose. In heaven, the gods will enquire concerning the 
welfare of Shri Ramachandra. If I reply that I have sent Rama 
into exile to please Kaikeyi, it will be looked upon as a falsehood, 
and none will believe it. Having passed innumerable years 
without a son, how should I, after long suffering and anxiety, 
being blessed with an heir, forsake the long-armed Rama ? 
" How can Rama, valorous, learned, tolerant and forbearing, 
whose eyes are like lotuses, be driven into exile by me ? How 
should I send the beautiful Rama, whose complexion is like 
the blue lotus, to the Dandaka forest ? Shri Rama, meriting 
every comfort and pleasure, undeserving of sorrow, how can I 
behold that wise Ramachandra in distress ? 
" Had I died without seeing Rama afflicted, who merits no 
suffering whatsoever, my spirit would have experienced joy in 
heaven. O Pitiless, O Sinful Kaikeyi, why, why dost thou 
compel me to send my dear and truthful son, Shri Ramachandra, 
to the forest ? I shall incur dishonour throughout the whole 
world." 
Thus lamenting and distracted, evening having fallen and 
the night creeping on apace, King Dasaratha afflicted and in 
great anguish, experienced no delight on beholding the moon. 
184 
AYODHYA KANDA 
The old king, sighing heavily, continued to lament, and gazing 
at the starry sky cried : " O Night, adorned with stars, do not 
pass into the dawn. O Auspicious Night, with great humility, 
I supplicate thee, have pity on me and do not pass away. I 
have no desire to behold the face of this cruel "Kaikeyi, who has 
caused me immeasurable distress." 
Then the monarch again entreated Kaikeyi saying : " A 
virtuous man and yet wretched, I take refuge in thee, for I have 
only a short while to live. O Auspicious One ! Know this ; 
I am a king and not alone but in the royal assembly have X 
proclaimed Rama as regent. Be gracious unto me, O Kaikeyi, 
O Child, O Giver of Delight ! Grant imperishable rulership 
to Shri Ramachandra and endear thyself to me. O Kaikeyi, 
thus shalt thou obtain great renown. 
" O Thou of beautiful face, let Rama be installed, so shalt 
thou cause pleasure to Shri Ramachandra, to Bharata, to the 
court, nay to the whole world." 
Then the pure-hearted sovereign, his eyes reddened in his 
distress burst into a flood of tears, but the wicked Kaikeyi 
disregarded both his flattery and his weeping. 
The king, realising the exile of Shri Rama could not be avoided, 
tell senseless to the earth. Signing deeply at every moment, 
King Dasaratha passed the night in great anguish. 
At dawn, the royal musicians striking up to awaken the great 
monarch, were ordered by him to be silent. 
chapter 14 
The king is overcome by grief ; the queen summons Shri Rama 
KAIKEYI beholding the king distracted with suffering, undecided 
how to act, and restless as a fish on dry land, said : — 
" O King, what is the meaning of thy grief and sorrow ? 
Having promised me two boons, wilt thou incur the sin of 
default ? Those versed in the secret of righteousness, call truth 
the essence of virtue. I ask thee but to protect truth for thine 
185 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
own good. O King, in ancient times, thy forbear, King Shivya 
fulfilled a promise given, by yielding up his body to a hawk 
and thus acquired a high spiritual state. Thus also the illustri ous Alarka gladly taking out his own eyes gave them to a blind 
brahmin versed in the Veda. The Lord of Waters, the ocean, 
paying due regard to truth, does not pass beyond its boundaries 
at the time of the full moon. Truth is Brahman. Truth is 
the crown of righteousness. The imperishable Veda proclaims 
the glory of truth. When the heart is purified by the practice 
of truth, Brahman is realised. O King, if thou holdest truth 
to be the fruit of virtue, then following truth grant me the two 
boons, O Bestower of Boons. For the sake of safeguarding thy 
future happiness, send Rama into exile ! Send Rama into exile 
at my request. Thrice I repeat my desire. If thou failest to 
exile Rama, I shall not survive the dishonour and shall yield up 
my life in thy presence." 
Hearing the words of Kaikeyi, King Dasaratha found himself 
bound and unable to escape, like King Bali of old in the presence 
of Vamana.1 Distraught, his mind agitated, his countenance 
pallid, the king resembled a bullock tottering between the yoke 
and the wheel. Anxiety and grief overwhelmed the king ; with 
a supreme effort, mustering his courage and controlling his 
senses, his eyes distended, he addressed Kaikeyi ; " O Sinful 
Woman, at the time of our nuptials, in the presence of the 
sacred flame, I took thy hand in mine, but to-day, I reject thee 
and the son born of thee, Prince Bharata. O Devi, the night 
is nearly passed and the sun about to rise. My Guru and the 
elders will urge me to perform the installation ceremony. Let 
the preparations made for the installation be used for my funeral 
rites. Let no part therein be taken by thee, O Kaikeyi, as thou 
dost oppose the installation of Shri Rama. How shall I look 
upon the faces of these people now filled with joy in anticipation 
of Rama's enthronement, that will soon become overcast and 
melancholy ? " 
The night illumined by the moon and stars passed away as 
the King was speaking, and day dawned. Then Kaikeyi, 
eloquent in speech but full of iniquity, transported with anger, 
spoke passionately : — 
1 Vamana — The holy Dwarf, a divine Incarnation. 
186 
AYODHYA KANDA 
" O King, why dost thou speak like one affected by a grave 
disease? Send for thy son Ramachandra to come hither. 
Install my son on the throne and send Rama into exile. Then 
shalt thou have accomplished thy duty." 
The king, like a well-bred horse smarting under the lash, 
replied : " I am caught in the net of dharma, I am bereft of 
understanding, let me behold my eldest son, Shri Rama." 
The morning had now dawned, and the night had fled ; the 
sun had risen and an auspicious planet was in the ascendant. 
The blessed Lord Vasishtha endowed with every excellent 
quality, surrounded by his disciples, holding the sacred articles 
required for the installation, came to the great door. Passing 
through the capital, Shri Vasishtha observed the streets swept 
and watered. Flags were fluttering everywhere in the breeze, 
flowers of many kinds were strewn on the roads and garlands 
hung here and there. All the inhabitants looked happy ; shops 
and stalls displayed a variety of merchandise, while incense 
mixed with ambergris and sandalwood perfumed the ah*. Every where people were celebrating the festival and eagerly awaiting 
the coronation of Ramachandra. 
Having passed through the city of Ayodhya, which resembled 
Amaravati, Shri Vasishtha came to the royal palace, and beheld 
at the gate an assembly of brahmins and teachers who enhanced 
the scene. Innumerable priests, skilled in the ritual of sacrifice, 
courtiers and leaders of the warrior class, as well as merchants 
were gathered there. Shri Vasishtha penetrated to the private 
apartments and delightedly entered there. At the door he 
beheld the charioteer Sumantra of pleasing looks and the holy 
sage begged him to announce his arrival to the king and inform 
his majesty that he had brought the sacred water of the Gunga 
in golden vessels, and various seeds, fragrant herbs and gems of 
different kinds. There was also honey, curds, clarified butter, 
parched rice, kusba grass, flowers and milk, together with 
eight beautiful virgins and a white elephant, A chariot drawn 
by four horses, an excellent sword and bow, a palanquin with 
bearers and a canopy resembling the moon in purity. Two 
white chamaras, a narrow-necked jar of gold, white heifers, 
a lion with great teeth, a fine steed, a lion throne, a tiger skin, 
sacrificial fuel and fire. Musicians of every kind, beautifully 
187 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
adorned women singers, teachers, priests, cows, deer and birds ; 
representatives of the people and merchants with their families 
were gathered there. These and many people inspired by 
affection and of gentle speech, had come with their leaders 
to see the coronation of Rama. 
Shri Vasishtha ordered Sumantra to inform the king with 
all haste that Rama should be installed when the Fushya star 
was in the ascendant. Sumantra instructed by the royal Sage 
Vasishtha, and having access to the person of the king, entered 
the palace crying " Jai ! Jai ! to his majesty ". The guards 
permitted him to enter without hindrance, and Sumantra, 
approaching the king, ignorant of his condition, began to praise 
his royal master, according to the prevailing custom. With 
great humility he addressed him, saying : " O Gracious Sover eign, as the sun at the breaking of day gives pleasure to the sea, 
so do thou give us joy by thy radiant countenance. Add to our 
delight, O Mighty Lord ! As in the morning Indra was adored 
by his charioteer, whereafter he defeated the asuras, so do I 
salute thee. I come to wake thee as the Vidyas and Vedas 
waken Brahma. As sun and moon stimulate the earth which 
supports all men and life, so do I come to waken thee, O Great 
Ruler. Awake, O Maharaj and rejoice the hearts of the people 
by thy sight. Don thy royal robes and adorn thyself with the 
great gems, resplendent like the sun on the crest of Mount 
Mem. O Sire, may the Moon, the Sun, Shiva and Kuvera 
be auspicious to thee. May Varuna, Agni and Indra grant thee 
success. The lovely night has passed and the auspicious day 
has dawned. O Royal Sage, arise and perform thy duties ; 
preparations for the installation of Rama are completed, the 
leading citizens and the inhabitants of the capital are waiting 
in reverence at the gate ; the blessed Sage Vasishtha, with his 
disciples, is at the door. Command us, O King, to inaugurate 
the coronation of Rama immediately ; as cattle without a 
keeper, an army without a general, night without the moon, 
cows without a bull, so is thy kingdom without a king 
to-day." 
The king hearing the peaceful words of Sumantra was 
once more submerged in the sea of sorrow ; though over come with grief, his eyes red with wrath, he answered him : 
188 
AYODHYA KANDA 
" O Sumantra, thy words of praise inflict great pain on me." 
Sumantra, beholding the miserable condition of his master, 
and hearing his anguished words, joining his palms in submission, 
stepped backwards, tongue-tied. 
Then Kaikeyi, skilled in achieving her own purpose, addressed 
Sumantra : " O Sumantra, being overjoyed on account of the 
installation of his son, the king has not slept this night. Being 
fatigued, he is now overcome with sleep. Go thou, therefore, 
and bring the illustrious Ramachandra hither ; this matter 
requires no deliberation." 
Sumantra reflected that the arrival of Shri Ramachandra 
would pacify the mind of the king : he speedily went to summon 
him and on the way reflected, " Why has Queen Kaikeyi 
summoned Rama in haste ? " The charioteer believed the 
eagerness of the king had prompted him to summon Shri 
Ramachandra for the purpose of his installation. Sumantra, 
happily came to the beautiful palace of Shri Rama which 
resembled a small island in the sea, and beheld there many 
people standing at the gate. 
He beheld many kings and great chieftains assembled in their 
allotted places. 
CHAPTER 15 
Sumantra hurries to Prince Rama's palace 
When night had given way to the dawn, brahmins well-versed 
in the Veda, together with the king's priests, came to the palace 
gate. With them came the counsellors, the chiefs of the army 
and leading merchants to witness the installation of Rama. 
The sun having risen and the Pushya planet with Karrata1 
being auspicious,' it being the time at which Rama was born, 
brahmins brought vessels of gold filled with water, a finely 
1 Cancer. 
1 In the right conjunction aatrologically. 
I«9 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
decorated throne and a resplendent chariot with a seat spread 
with a tiger skin. Water was brought from the confluence of 
the Gunga and Yamuna and from the holy rivers, lakes and 
wells, from the westward flowing streams and those descending 
from great heights and flowing through the plains. From the 
seas also water was provided and stored in shining vessels of 
gold and silver, wherein lotus blooms floated and on whose 
surface sticks of Gular1 and banyan were sprinkled. 
Honey, curds, clarified butter, kusha grass, and flowers were 
also provided. Beautifully adorned singing women were like wise present. Chamaras with handles of gold set with jewels, 
a beautiful canopy, scintillating and round as the moon, were 
furnished for the ceremony, also a white caparisoned steed, a 
young elephant of great size, and eight virgins gracefully attired. 
Musicians with vinas, bards and those who proclaim the 
king's praise; everything required for the installation of a 
sovereign of the dynasty of Ikshwaku was furnished by command 
of the king. Not beholding King Dasaratha at the appointed 
time, those present said : " Who will announce our arrival to 
the monarch ? The sun has risen, but the king has not come 
forth ; every preparation for the installation of Rama is now 
complete." 
While they were thus speaking, Sumantra, honoured servant 
of the state, addressed the royal guests, and maharajahs, saying : 
"As commanded by the king, I purpose to bring Shri Rama 
before him. On my return, I will ask his majesty for you who 
are worthy of honour, the reason for the delay." 
The aged Sumantra came to the door of the inner apartment 
and entered, unannounced. Praising the royal dynasty of Raghu, 
he reached the chamber where the king was lying on the ground. 
Pouring forth his praise, he approached the arras hanging before 
the king's chamber, and said : " O Sovereign, may Surya, 
Kuvera, Varuna, Agni and Indra grant thee victory. The 
Goddess Night, has departed, dawn has come, arise O Lion 
among Kings ! Brahmins, ambassadors and chiefs of the forces 
have assembled and are desirous of seeing thee." 
The king, rousing himself, said to his chief minister, Suman tra: "Bring Shri Ramachandra hither speedily. Why dost 
> Gular — Twigs of a fragrant resinous tree. 
190 
AYODHYA KANDA 
thou delay ? I do not sleep, go bring Shri Rama with all haste." 
Sumantra, Bowing to the king, went forth to execute his 
commands. Thinking the installation of Rama to be near, he 
set out for the palace, passing joyfully along the royal route 
gay with flags and banners. Hearing on all sides, people 
conversing of the coming event, he mingled with the happy 
throng and after walking some distance, saw Shri Rama's 
palace, white as the peak of Mount Kailasha and fair as Indra's 
abode. 
The turrets, adorned with golden images, studded with 
coral and jewels, rendered the palace resplendent, like the 
winter clouds on the caverns of Mount Sumeru. The main 
gateway, decorated with wreaths of gems and pearls, was 
fragrant with sandalwood and ambergris, sweet-scented like 
the Malaygiri mountain and abounding with cranes and pea cocks. The doors and walls of the inner apartments were 
decorated with paintings of lions, tigers and wolves, pleasing 
to the eye and mind. 
The palace of Rama, resplendent as the sun and moon, 
furnished like the palace of Kuvera and equalling the abode 
of Indra, was surrounded by many kinds of birds who sported 
there. Men from distant lands in bejewelled apparel waited 
bearing gifts in their hands, eager to behold Rama. The 
spacious palace was sumptuously furnished and the attendants 
serving there were men of small stature. 
Shri Sumantra, delighting the people, in his chariot drawn 
by horses, came to the door of the palace which was filled with 
untold wealth and surrounded by deer and peacocks gladdening 
the heart. 
Entering the gates and greeting those dear to Rama, Sumantra 
reached the door of the inner apartment. There also he heard 
everyone conversing of Shri Rama and he rejoiced to hear them 
speaking of his glory. He beheld the inner inclosure, resplen dent and lofty as Mount Meru, which was rendered charming 
by the presence of many deer and birds. There, too, he beheld 
those from various lands, descending from their chariots, 
bearing gifts. 
He observed an elephant equal to a hill in height, resembling 
a dark cloud, who had never known the touch of a goad and 
191 o 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
whose forehead was dripping with sweat. Its name was 
Shatrunja, and it stood prepared to carry Rama. • 
Proceeding further, Sumantra beheld many charioteers and 
horsemen ready with their caparisoned horses. Continuing on 
his way, Shri Rama's chief minister saw countless artists and 
poets gathered there. 
Passing through the multitude, he came to the private apart ment of Shri Rama. Unchallenged, the great Sumantra, 
resembling a cloud, entered the apartment as a crocodile enters 
the gem-filled ocean. 
CHAPTER 16 
Shri Rama in Ms chariot drives swiftly to the king 
Passing through a further doorway, thronged with people, 
Sumantra came to another gate where no guard stood. He 
beheld there many young men, alert, vigilant, and devoted to 
their master, armed with bows and axes, and wearing beautiful 
ear-rings. Beyond these, Sumantra saw aged men, clad in red, 
gorgeously attired, holding staves in their hands, guarding the 
apartments of the Queens. Seeing the virtuous Sumantra 
approaching with others, they stood respectfully at attention. 
Sumantra, addressing these humble and experienced attend ants, said : " Be pleased to inform Shri Ramachandra that 
Sumantra waits at the door." 
They, ever desiring the good of Rama, informed the prince 
and Sita of the arrival of Sumantra. Knowing Sumantra to be 
in the confidence of his royal father, Shri Rama affectionately 
caused him to be summoned. 
The charioteer, entering there, perceived Shri Ramachandra 
resembling Kuvera himself, seated on a golden couch, spread 
with soft cushions and richly ornamented. His brow was 
anointed with pure and fragrant sandalwood-paste, the colour 
of the blood of a wild boar. 
By his side the Princess Sita, as beautiful as the moon attended 
192 
AYODHYA KANDA ■
by the Chitra1 planet, was seated, holding a chamara in her 
hand. 
Sumantra, versed in the customs of the court, offered respectful 
salutations to Shri Rama who appeared as resplendent as the 
noonday sun. With joined palms, Sumantra humbly enquired 
as to the prince's welfare and addressed him who was thus 
seated on the couch, saying : " O Excellent Son of Queen 
Kaushalya, the king desires to see thee in the apartment of 
Queen Kaikeyi, be pleased to go thither without delay." 
Thus addressed, that Lion among men, the most illustrious 
Ramachandra, filled with joy, on receiving the summons, replied : 
" Be it so, I will go thither with all speed." Then turning 
to Sita, he said : " O Devi, my mother Kaikeyi, and my father 
have consulted each other concerning those matters relative to 
my installation. O Princess of Beautiful Eyes, my mother 
Kaikeyi, ever benevolent and accomplished, knowing the king's 
desire, is influencing him for my good ! That daughter of the 
great King of Kaikeya, ever obedient to my royal father desires 
my welfare. He, with his beloved queen, has sent for me 
through Sumantra, who is ever well-disposed to me, and desires 
what is pleasing to me, as does the king, my sire, and the queen, 
my mother. Assuredly, to-day the king will proclaim me regent. 
I shall go to my royal father in all haste, do thou converse 
happily with thy maids of honour." 
Hearing these courteous words, spoken by her lord, the 
lotus-eyed Princess Sita reciting the Peace Chant, followed 
Shri Ramachandra to the door. She said : " O Maharaj, the 
kingdom has many learned brahmins who will crown thee, as 
Indra was crowned by Brahma. When the preliminary initiation 
is completed and thou dost perform the Rajasuya* sacrifice and 
I behold thee dressed in an antelope skin with the deer's horns 
in thy hand, do thou then allow me to pay thee homage. May 
Indra in the east protect thee, may Yama in the south protect 
thee, may Varuna in the west protect thee, may Kuvera in the 
north protect thee." 
Having taken leave of Sita, Shri Rama left his palace with 
Sumantra. Shri Rama, going forth from his palace, as a lion 
1 Chitra — Spica virginis. 
1 Rajasuya sacrifice — a great sacrifice performed at a king's installation. 
193 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
issues from his cave, beheld Shri Lakshmana humbly waiting 
at the door. 
At the middle gate, Shri Rama encountered his friends and 
honoured those who had gathered there to witness his coronation. 
Then that lion among men, the son of King Dasaratha, 
mounted his chariot resplendent as name, spread with tiger skins 
and which, on its course, made a noise like thunder. Inlaid 
with gold and gems, it dazzled the beholders as does the 
brightness of the sun. The horses yoked to the chariot, equalling 
young elephants, galloped as swiftly as the steeds of Indra. 
Shri Rama, seated in his resplendent chariot moving rapidly 
with a sound as of thunder issuing from the clouds, appeared 
like the moon coursing in the heavens. His younger brother, 
Prince Lakshmana attended him standing behind him in the 
chariot, with a chamara in his hand. 
On every side, shouts of " Jai ! Jai ! " arose, while the 
multitude followed Shri Rama's chariot with its cavalcade of 
mounted horsemen and mountain-like elephants. Warriors 
whose brows were anointed with sandalwood paste and amber gris, preceded the royal chariot bearing naked swords in their 
hands. Then followed the musicians and bards singing their 
praises and the shouts of warriors resembling the roaring of 
lions. The chariot went forward amid a rain of flowers showered 
down from the balconies and windows by beautifully adorned 
women, of faultless limbs, who thus offered salutations to Rama 
and desirous of his welfare chanted hymns of adoration, saying : 
" O Delight of Thy Mother, whose heart to-day is raised in 
exultation because of thee ; to-day thy royal mother will see 
thee in possession of the throne. 
*' The Princess Sita, exceedingly dear to Rama is esteemed the 
most fortunate woman in the world by womankind who, believing 
her to have practised a high degree of virtue and ascetism in 
a previous birth, say, "As the planet Rohini1 found union with 
the moon, so has the Princess Sita found union with 
Rama." 
Hearing the delightful eulogies of the women, Raghava 
pressed on, listening to the converse of the citizens and those 
come from afar, concerning his approaching coronation. Some 
1 Rohini — fourth of the lunar aiterum*. 
»94 
AYODHYA KANDA 
said : " To-day, Shri Ramachandra, our lord, will acquire 
limitless wealth and power through the favour of his royal sire. 
Those people over whom he holds sway, will obtain their heart's 
desire and the fulfilment of their ambitions. Should he enjoy 
the kingdom for long, it will be our gain, since no distress will 
visit the kingdom while he is king." 
Thus preceded by neighing horses and the praises of his 
dynasty sung by chroniclers and bards, Rama advanced like the 
god Kuvera, while on every side he beheld the decorated high ways filled with male and female elephants, chariots, horses and 
people and stalls overflowing with gems and merchandise. 
CHAPTER 17 
He advances to the palace amidst the plaudits of Ms friends 
Seated in his chariot, the prince beheld his delighted friends 
and the city, white as a cloud, adorned with flags and banners 
fluttering here and there, fragrant with the perfume of incense, 
filled with a multitude of men and enriched by stately buildings. 
Passing through the scented highways where heaps of sandal wood were burning, and rare perfumes, wool and silken cloths, 
unpierced pearls, and innumerable gems being exposed to view, 
with stalls replete with articles of food and drink and merchandise 
of every kind, he beheld the royal highway adorned like the 
pathway of the gods in heaven, with every auspicious mark, 
such as curds, rice, sandalwood, parched grain and milk. 
Traversing the cross-roads gay with flowers and fragrant objects, 
amidst the blessings and salutations of his friends, he acknow ledged their praise with humility. Those advanced in years, 
were crying : " O Prince, thou who art to be crowned to-day, 
let thy rule resemble thy grandfather's and thy great grand father's, thus shall we prosper as in the days of thine ancestors, 
may our happiness exceed even those times. Neither do we 
require the comforts of this world, nor those of the other world. 
Beholding Shri Ramachandra returning after his coronation, 
195 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
our delight will exceed all else. Nothing is dearer to us than 
the installation of Shri Ramachandra of limitless glory." 
Thus did Raghava advance, amidst the eulogies of his friends 
the focus of every eye and heart, serene and imperturbable. 
Those who were unable to behold him or were unnoticed by 
him, became objects of contempt to others, nay, they were a 
reproach to themselves. The all-compassionate Ramachandra 
looked on each of the four castes with equal condescension. 
Each loved him according to his capacity. 
Passing the temples, the sacred groves and pavilions, Shri 
Ramachandra circumambulated them in reverence. He now 
beheld the royal palace, resembling a white cloud, its towers 
like the snow-capped peaks of Mount Kailasa, its balconies 
seeming almost to reach the skies like the fire chariots of the 
gods ; the pleasure houses set with precious gems, caused the 
whole palace to excel all those on earth and rival even the abode 
of Indra. 
Approaching his father's palace, Shri Rama passed through 
the three gateways guarded by archers, and proceeded on foot 
through the fourth and fifth enclosures. There, leaving his 
attendants, he entered the private apartments of the king. 
The multitude seeing Rama enter the palace were filled with 
joy and awaited his coming forth as the sea awaits the coming 
of the full moon. 
CHAPTER 18 
He sees the Mug full of anguish and speechless ; Kaikeyi utters 
the cruel words 
Entering the private apartment, Shri Ramachandra beheld 
King Dasaratha full of distress, his countenance pale, seated 
with Kaikeyi on the royal couch. First placing his head at the 
feet of his royal sire, he then respectfully offered salutations 
to Mother Kaikeyi. 
The king, his eyes filled with tears, his throat choked with 
196 
AYODHYA KANDA 
emotion, could only utter the word " Rama " and nothing more. 
As the heart of a man who accidentally touches a serpent is filled 
with fear, so was the heart of Rama on beholding the king's 
misery. The king agitated by grief and remorse, sighing bitterly, 
filled with anguish, resembled the ocean which, calm by nature, 
is agitated by a mighty storm, or Rahu1 causing the sun's eclipse, 
or the soul of a sage stirred by the utterance of falsehoods. 
Without knowing the cause of the king's distress, Shri Rama 
became agitated like the sea on the day of the full moon. Shri 
Ramachandra, ever engaged in seeking his father's welfare, 
reflected : " Why is my father not happy to see me to-day ? 
Formerly, when displeased, on beholding me he was pacified, 
but to-day, beholding me, he is troubled. Why is he overcome 
with grief and bereft of his glory ? " 
Making obeisance to Kaikeyi, he said : " If by an involuntary 
offence, I have caused my father displeasure, then O Mother, 
propitiate him for me. Erstwhile, even when displeased, my 
father showed favour to me, but to-day, I behold him pale 
of countenance, and deeply distressed, nor does he speak to me. 
Is my revered father suffering any physical or mental distress ? 
It is rare indeed for a man to be consistently happy. Has his 
majesty seen any grievous fault in the amiable Prince Bharata 
or the valorous Shatrughna, or in my mothers or in me ? I do 
not desire to live a single instant if his majesty is not satisfied 
with me, or is displeased or if I have disobeyed him. Why 
should not man obey his parents, who are the source of his 
birth and who are living gods ? Hast thou spoken harsh words, 
in vanity, to the king, on hearing which his heart is lacerated ? 
O Devi, answer my question truly. Tell me the cause of this 
unprecedented grief in my sire." 
Kaikeyi thus addressed by Shri Rama, dead to all shame 
and skilful in defence of her selfish purpose, spoke arrogantly : 
" O Rama, the king is not angry nor is he suffering physical 
pain, he has something on his mind which he fears to disclose 
to thee. He loves thee dearly and so hesitates to tell thee this 
unpleasant matter. It is for thee to fulfil what he has promised 
to me and to act in accordance with it. Having formerly granted 
1 Rahu — a mythical demon, said to cause the eclipse of the sun and moon 
by iwallowing it. 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
me a boon, he now repents it like a common man. To promise 
a boon and then seek to evade it, is like the setting up of a dam 
when the water has gone. O Rama, have a care lest the king 
abandon truth for thy sake. Among holy men, truth is said 
to be the root of dharma. Should the king command thee 
and thou fulfil his command without further deliberation, then 
will I reveal the whole truth to thee. The king may not 
communicate with thee directly, therefore, be ready to execute 
what I command on his behalf." 
Shri Rama, highly agitated, replied to Kaikeyi in the presence 
of the king : " For shame, O Devi, to speak thus to me. At 
the command of my father I am willing to do anything, even 
to casting myself into the fire. At the bidding of the king 
my parent and author of my welfare, I will gladly drink deadly 
poison or throw myself into the sea. O Devi, disclose to me 
his will, I vow to fulfil his command. Be assured, O Mother, 
Rama does not utter falsehood." 
To the ever truthful Rama, Kaikeyi answered in these wound ing words : " O Ramachandra, long ago the Maharajah fought 
against the asuras and fell wounded on the field. I then 
preserved him and he promised me two boons. For these I ask 
the installation of Prince Bharata and thy exile to the Dandaka 
forest. O Great One, if thou desirest that thou and thy father 
should uphold truth, then hear roe. In obedience to thy father, 
now go into exile for fourteen years. Let the preparations made 
for thine installation be used for the enthronement of Bharata. 
Giving up thy claims to the kingdom, do thou with matted hair, 
wearing a deer skin, live in the Dandaka forest for seven and 
again seven years. Let the earth be ruled by Prince Bharata. 
This kingdom filled with an abundance of gems, horses and 
elephants must be his. On account of this is the king distressed, 
his countenance pale and he is unable to look on thee. O Rama, 
obey the king and preserve him by fulfilling his command." 
At these cruel words of Kaikeyi, Shri Ramachandra betrayed 
no sign of distress, but the king realising the future suffering 
of his son was overwhelmed with grief. 
198 
AYODHYA KANDA 
CHAPTER 19 
Shi Ramackandra betrays no sign of distress and prepares 
for exile 
The slayer of his foes, Shri Ramachandra, hearing the words 
of Kaikeyi, keen as the pangs of death, was in no way moved 
by them, and answered : " Be it so ! To honour the promise 
made by the king, I will leave for the forest immediately, with 
matted locks, attired in raiment made of bark, but I desire 
to know why the illustrious sovereign does not address me ? 
O Devi, fear not, I vow, in thy presence that I shall dwell 
in the forest, dressed in bark with matted locks j rejoice, there fore ! Whatever command the benevolent monarch, ever 
mindful of my welfare, shall lay upon me, I will gladly execute 
to please him. There is nothing I would not do for him without 
hesitation, but one painful thought still lingers in my mind. 
Why does the king not speak to me himself of Bharata's 
enthronement? O Mother, by thine order, I am willing to 
surrender to my brother Bharata, not only the kingdom, but 
also Sita, together with every object of desire, my wealth and 
my life. How much more would I do for my father, that he 
may preserve the vow of truth and serve thy purpose. Render 
this matter clear to the king. How is it that I behold my father 
with bowed head, shedding tears ? Let messengers on swift 
horses summon Prince Bharata immediately from his uncle's 
house, while I, without considering the merit or demerit of 
my sire's injunctions, enter the Dandaka forest for fourteen years." 
Queen Kaikeyi highly pleased by the words uttered by Shri 
Ramachandra and assured of his exile, urged him to depart, 
saying : " So be it ; messengers on swift footed horses will 
summon Bharata immediately from his uncle's home. O Rama, 
being ready to enter the forest, do not delay : depart, therefore, 
with all speed. Overcome with shame, the king dare not ask 
thee to depart, but do thou disregard this. 0 Ramachandra, 
the king will neither bathe nor partake of food till thou hast 
entered upon thine exile." 
The king, hearing the words of Kaikeyi, cried " Woe ", 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
" Woe ", and, stricken with grief, fell senseless on die golden 
couch. Raising up the king, Shri Ramachandra, urged on by 
the words of Kaikeyi as a horse under the lash, prepared to enter 
the forest in all haste. His heart unmoved by the queen's cruel 
words, he replied : " O Devi, I did not desire the kingdom 
to acquire wealth and power, but becoming regent, I wished to 
preserve dharma. Know me, like the sages, to be a protector 
of dharma. If I can render any service to my father at the cost 
of my life, it is as if already accomplished. There is no greater 
good in this world than service to one's sire by thought, word 
and deed. On this command, not issued by the king but by 
thee, I will dwell for fourteen years in the uninhabited forest. 
O Sati, thou hast been my mother and yet art unacquainted 
with my nature. If thou had'st known me, no need would 
have arisen to consult my father on so insignificant a matter. 
Now I go to take leave of my mother, Queen Kaushalya, and 
offer consolation to my Sita. Let Bharata rule the kingdom 
according to dharma and serve our royal father faithfully. This 
is a son's abiding duty." 
Hearing the words of Shri Ramachandra, the king, speechless 
and overcome with grief, wept aloud, shedding bitter tears. 
The most illustrious Rama made obeisance to his father lying 
pitifully there and, then bowing to the feet of Kaikeyi, left 
the apartment. Having circumambulated the King and Queen 
Kaikeyi with extreme reverence, Shri Ramachandra came forth 
from the inner chamber and beheld his friends standing at the 
door. Shri Lakshmana full of wrath, his eyes suffused with 
tears, followed Rama. 
Shri Rama circumambulated the sacred articles prepared for 
the installation ceremony in great reverence, and prayed that 
they should be dedicated to the installation of Prince Bharata. 
Then turning from them, without a backward glance he slowly 
withdrew. 
The abandoning of the ceremony failed to impair the serenity 
of Shri Ramachandra, the splendour of his countenance remained 
unchanged as the moon suffers no diminution of its beauty in 
the waning period. On renouncing the kingdom and departing 
for exile, Shri Ramachandra resembled a great yogi and none 
observed any change of mood in him. 
AYODHYA KANDA 
Relinquishing the royal canopy, the beautiful chamara and 
bidding a respectful and affectionate farewell to his friends and 
the people's delegates and guests, remembering the sorrow 
occasioned to them, and restraining his senses, the prince went 
to the apartments of his mother, to break the distressing tidings 
to her. Those about him found no change in him, neither in 
the adornments of his body, donned in preparation for the 
royal ceremony, nor in the cheerfulness of his countenance. 
Such was the truthful Ramachandra. As the autumnal moon 
does not lose its splendour, so the cheerfulness of the mighty armed Rama did not diminish. Addressing those standing near 
with sweetness and respect, he approached his mother Kaushalya. 
The most valorous Prince Lakshmana, the sharer of his 
brother's joys and griefs, followed him. Aware of the great 
distress that would arise in the hearts of his friends, Shri Rama 
for his mother's sake entered the palace in a serene and cheerful 
mood. 
CHAPTER 20 
Queen Kaushalya is afflicted and helpless with sorrow 
Perceiving that Lion among men, Shri Ramachandra, his palms 
joined in a gesture of farewell, coming forth from his father's 
apartments, the ladies of the inner chamber began to lament 
loudly, saying : " Shall Shri Rama, who fulfilled all our desires 
without awaiting the injunction of his royal sire and who is 
our sole refuge, to-day go into exile ? 
" From his birth he has honoured and respected us as his 
own mother, Queen Kaushalya. When we have spoken harsh 
words to him, he was never angry, nor did he ever give any 
cause for displeasure. That prince who ever reconciled those 
who were affronted, is to-day going into exile. Our king, 
acting like an ignorant man, is determined to destroy his subjects 
and is sending Rama, who is the sole support of all beings, 
into exile." 
Thus, weeping bitterly, all the maids of honour and maid THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
servants of the king lamented like cows bereft of their calves. 
The king hearing their cries of distress, deeply afflicted with 
grief for his son, overcome with shame, fell down on his couch. 
Shri Ramachandra, grieving for the woes of his relatives, 
breathing like a mighty elephant approached his mother's apart ments with Lakshmana. 
Entering there, he beheld at the first gate the venerable and 
aged guardian of the door and his attendants, who rose on 
perceiving the prince, crying " Jai " " Jai " to him. Reaching 
the second gate, he met with the aged brahmins honoured by 
the state for their great learning. Saluting them, he entered 
the third gate where women, the aged and children were keeping 
guard. The women gave their blessings to the prince and went 
to inform the Queen Kaushalya of Shri Rama's arrival. 
According to scriptural injunctions, the queen had spent the 
whole night worshipping Shri Vishnu, desirous of her son's 
good. Gad in a silken sari, she was pouring oblations into the 
sacred fire, with joy. Shri Rama, entering the chamber of his 
mother, beheld her offering oblations into the sacred flame; 
he beheld there the sacrificial articles prepared for the worship 
of the gods ; curds, rice, butter, sweetmeats, rice cooked in milk, 
garlands of white flowers, sesamura seed, fuel and jars filled 
with pure water. 
Shri Rama saw the fair complexioned queen in a white robe, 
emaciated through long fasts. After a time, perceiving her son, 
Shri Ramachandra, she ran towards him as a mare runs to meet 
its foal. Embracing him, inspired by maternal love, she 
addressed the great Rama with gende and affectionate words : 
" O my Son, mayest thou become aged and righteous like the 
royal sages. Mayest thou attain the age appropriate to thy 
dynasty. Mayest thou acquire renown and fulfil thy family 
duties. O Dear Prince, now approach thy truth-loving father, 
who awaits thee to-day to appoint thee regent of the kingdom." 
Offering her son a seat, she placed before him sweetmeats ; 
Shri Rama, touching them only, with joined palms humbly 
addressed her; he, ever affectionate and now showing even 
greater tenderness in protecting his mother's honour, said: 
" O Goddess, thou art not yet acquainted with the great calamity 
that threatens us. I must go to the Dandaka forest and have 
AYODHYA KANDA 
come to seek thy sanction. It is the season of sorrow for thee, 
Sita and Lakshmana. Now, entering the forest, my seat will 
be of kusha grass and there, residing for fourteen years, I shall 
live on honey, roots and fruits. The king has conferred the 
regency on Prince Bharata and I, giving up royal fare, must 
enter die forest to eat the food of ascetics there. By the king's 
command, Bharata will be installed as regent. For fourteen 
years, it is ordained that I shall live in the forest, practising 
asceticism far from the haunts of men. The forest from 
henceforth will be my home; roots and berries will be my 
food!" 
Hearing these words, the queen fell to the ground like the 
bough of a fir tree severed from the trunk, by an axe ! 
Resembling a nymph fallen from heaven or a phantom tree 
struck down, she fell. Shri Ramachandra raised her to her 
couch, her body soiled with dust, like a steed that has rolled 
on the earth and gently brushed away the dust with his own 
hands. The queen, worthy of every happiness, seated by her 
son, filled with distress, addressed him in the presence of Shri 
Lakshmana: — 
" O Child, O Rama, hadst thou not been born of my womb, 
I should have suffered the distress of being childless, but I 
should have been spared this sorrow. O My Son, were I a 
barren woman, I should not have been thus afflicted, for a barren 
woman has but one grief, that of being childless. The fortune 
that befalls a wife, alas ! was not to be enjoyed by me for long ! 
Having a son, I looked for happiness, but now, though chief 
queen, I must bear the piercing words of my rival consorts, 
no longer showing me deference. What greater calamity can 
befall a woman? The insults that will be heaped upon me, 
without thee, will prove unendurable. Alas ! This is the 
season of unfathomable grief and affliction ! O My Son, when 
thou art gone, I shall cease to live. As chief queen, I have 
already borne great provocation ; now, serving Kaikeyi, I shall 
be deemed lower than her maidservant, indeed some say I 
am already her slave. Those who attend me, will desert me 
on beholding Bharata made regent." 
Then Queen Kaushalya growing angry, began to utter bitter 
203 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
words, saying : " How shall I, thus afflicted, look on the face 
of Kaikeyi ? O Rama, seventeen years have passed since thou 
didst receive the holy thread.1 Since then, I have lived in 
expectation of thine installation and the termination of my 
sorrows, but now X must suffer further. I shall not be able 
to endure this. O Rama, I shall not be able to suffer the 
contumely of the other queens in my old age. O Child, not 
beholding thy countenance resembling the full moon, how shall 
I bear this miserable life? I have kept innumerable fasts, 
worshipped the gods and nourished thee till now, yet un fortunate as I am, it has proved to be in vain. Surely my heart 
is made of stone that it has not broken to-day, it resembles 
a river in the rainy season that does not overflow under continued 
rain. Surely death has forgotten me or there is no room in 
his abode. Had it not been so, he would have carried me hence 
to-day like a doe carried away by a lion. Assuredly my heart 
must be as hard as iron that it is not riven under this affliction. 
O why does not the earth open and engulf me ; it seems one 
cannot die before the time appointed. Those sacred austerities, 
fasts, meditation and penance undertaken for the prosperity of 
my child have proved vain, like seeds sown in a barren field. 
If at this time of sorrow, I might die, threatened with thy 
separation, I should embrace death as willingly as a cow deprived 
of its calf. O My Son, of what use is life now to me, robbed 
of the sight of thy face resembling the full moon ? Kay, I will 
follow thee to the forest like a feeble cow following its calf." 
Queen Kaushalya, the mother of Rama, afflicted and helpless, 
realising her own unfortunate position, and her son to be bound 
in the service of truth, lamented like a kinnari whose offspring 
has been made captive. 
1 A brahmin boy is invested with the holy thread at about eight yean of age, 
the ceremony is called Upa-naya. 
It is possible that Shri Rama received it earlier. 
AYODHYA KANDA 
CHAPTER 21 
Shri Rama, in spite of the laments of the queen and Shri 
Lakshmana, prepares for departure 
Shri Lakshmana, overcome with grief, addressed Mother 
Kaushalya in words suited to the occasion. He said : " O Mother, 
it cannot be pleasing to thee that Rama, at the command of the 
king, who is subject to a woman, and oblivious of the prosperity 
of the kingdom, should go to the forest. Old age has impaired 
the intellect of the monarch who, impelled by desire, is no longer 
master of his senses ; what words will he not utter ? I see 
no fault in Ramachandra for which he should be exiled and 
deprived of his kingdom. I know no man whether friend or foe 
who can find fault with Rama even in absence. Like a god, 
he is guileless, self-controlled and forbearing even to his foes ; 
what righteous king would abandon such a son without cause ? 
What son versed in the discharge of a sovereign's duties would 
give obedience to so puerile a king ? " 
Addressing Rama, Lakshmana continued : " O Brother, before 
the multitude become acquainted with these tidings, assume 
the reins of the kingdom, I will assist thee in the undertaking. 
0 Raghava, who will dare oppose thee, when like death itself, 
1 stand by thy side, armed with my bow ? If two or three, 
nay if all the people of Ayodhya resist thee in thine undertaking, 
I will destroy them. If all the supporters of Bharata oppose 
thee, not even one shall escape. The meek are ever oppressed. 
Should our father, inspired by Kaikeyi, become our enemy, 
then, though worthy of protection, I will undoubtedly slay him ! 
Even should a spiritual preceptor, prompted by egoity, follow 
the evil path and do what ought not to be done, he must be 
restrained. 
" On what authority does the king confer the kingdom on 
the son of Kaikeyi, when the son of the chief queen, rightly heir 
to the throne, still lives ? O Slayer of thy Foes, who will dare 
to incur our enmity and give Bharata the kingdom ? 
" O Mother, I swear by the truth, by my bow, by the laws 
of charity, by the merit acquired in worshipping the gods, that 
205 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
I am Shri Rama's willing servant. 0 Devi, should Rama enter 
the blazing fire or the dark forest, know I shall have preceded 
him. O Goddess, do thou and Shri Ramachandra behold my 
prowess by which I shall destroy all your sufferings, as the sun 
destroys darkness. I will also slay the king enslaved by Kaikeyi, 
who is aged, contemptible, of unsubdued mind and in his 
second childhood." 
Hearing the words of the noble Lakshmana, Queen Kaushalya 
was overcome with grief and said to Shri Ramachandra : " O 
Child, thou knowest the content of thy brother's heart, now act 
as thou considerest meet. It does not befit thee to abandon 
thy sorrow-stricken mother at the unjust words of her rival. 
0 Righteous One, if thou art established in dharma, then remain 
here, serve me and acquire virtue. There is no higher duty 
than service of the mother. I am, with the king, equally an 
object of thy reverence, and I command thee not to go to the 
forest. In thy separation, there is no occasion for rejoicing, 
neither do I desire to live, but with thee I will gladly live, 
sustaining myself on herbs alone. If thou, leaving me afflicted 
with grief, go to the forest, then shall I refuse food and yield up 
my life. Then, O My Son, being responsible for my death thou 
wilt, like Samudra,1 unmindful of thy mother, enter hell." 
Seeing his mother, the Queen Kaushalya, thus lamenting, 
the righteous Ramachandra spoke to her dutifully, saying : " O 
Goddess, I cannot disregard my father's commands, therefore 
1 bow before thee and entreat thy favour and sanction to enter 
the forest. Know that the Sage Kandu, a great pundit, 
acquainted with his yogic duty, slew a cow in obedience to his 
father's commands, knowing it to be a sin, which was thereafter 
not charged against him. 
" In ancient times, likewise, in our own dynasty, the sons 
of King Sagara, digging the earth, sacrificed their lives at their 
father's behest. At the command of his father, the son of 
Jamadagnya, Parasurama, with his axe, cut off the head of his 
mother Renuka. O Devi, these and other godlike men have 
obeyed their rather resolutely. I, too, without hesitation, shall 
perform that which benefits my father. O Mother, not I alone 
obey my father but all those virtuous men, mentioned by me, 
1 Samudra — the Lord of riven who killed a brahmin. 
206 
AYODHYA KANDA 
have been obedient to their father's will. I follow no new law* 
nor one contrary to the traditions of the royal dynasty, but tread 
the path of my illustrious ancestors. I am accomplishing nought 
which has not already been accomplished in this world. He 
who acts in accordance with his father's commands does not 
fall from virtue." 
Having spoken thus to his mother, Shri Rama addressed 
Lakshmana, saying : " O Lakshmana, I am acquainted with 
thine immeasurable love for me, thy valour and thy prowess ; 
none can withstand thee. O Lakshmana, my mother endowed 
with every good quality is now subject to misery and grief 
through ignorance of dharma and lack of resignation. O 
Brother, dharma is the highest good on earth, Truth and 
dharma are one. My father's command is founded on dharma, 
hence it is superior to my mother's ruling. O Hero, it is 
unworthy in one seeking the supreme fruit of dharma, not to 
fulfil the promise made to his father, mother or a learned 
brahmin, I cannot, therefore, disregard my father's command. 
O Hero, inspired by my father, Mother Kaikeyi has urged me 
to this course, therefore, 0 Lakshmana, relinquish the idea of 
bloodshed and embracing the state of virtue, follow me." 
Thus lovingly addressing Lakshmana, with bowed head and 
in great humility Rama turned to Queen Kaushalya and said : 
" O Goddess, now grant me permission to go into exile. In 
my absence pray for me. Having honoured my vow, I shall 
return, like King Yayati who falling to earth from heaven, again 
ascended thither. O Mother, comfort my unhappy father. 
Have no anxiety, O Mother, I shall return after fourteen years 
as desired by my father. Do thou, Sita, Lakshmana and 
Sumitra obey my royal sire. This is the ancient tradition. O 
Mother, disregarding the preparations made for mine installation, 
let thy mind be freed from grief and allow me to go into exile 
as ordained by dharma." 
Hearing the words of Rama, inspired by righteous motives, 
spoken with courage and equanimity, Queen Kaushalya as one 
restored to life, gazed steadfastly at Rama and said : " O My 
Son, if thou art versed in dharma and art mindful of the good 
done to thee by thy parents, then am I as woithy of thy respect 
as thy father. O My Son, do not abandon thine unfortunate 
207 p 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
mother and enter the forest. O My Child, of what use is my 
life without thee ? The earth, the region of the pittris, heaven 
and the region of Mahaloka, which are the abodes of highest 
bliss, for me are all void without thee. An hour with thee is 
my greatest delight O My Son." 
Shri Rama, hearing his mother's lament, was agitated, like 
a king who is perturbed, when on a dark night his torch-bearers 
are assailed on the way. 
Then the dutiful Rama again addressed his mother rendered 
almost senseless with grief and Lakshmana distressed and 
disquieted, and spoke to them for their good, in words that were 
full of integrity : — 
" O Lakshmana, I know of thy prowess and the intensity of 
thy devotion to me, but now in opposition to my purpose, thou 
dost increase my mother's misery. O Brother, there are three 
means to happiness in this world, they are righteousness, 
prosperity and pleasure. Those who love righteousness should 
pursue it as a wife acquires merit by being obedient to her 
husband, and pleasure by endearing herself to him and prosperity 
by becoming a mother. That undertaking which does not 
ensure these three, should be given up and that by which they 
are secured should be carried out. He who pursues prosperity 
alone, is without friends and has many enemies, and he who is 
devoted to pleasure, which is not based on righteousness, is an 
object of contempt. O Brother, the king is firstly our preceptor, 
secondly our father and thirdly he is an aged man. From the 
point of view of dharma, I must obey his commands, whether 
they are inspired by anger or desire. As a righteous man, I 
must fulfil his behests. Rare is the son so ruthless as to disobey 
his father. How can I evade the behests of my sire, who is 
my parent and has full authority over me as a king, and further 
is the consort of my dear mother Kaushalya ? How, therefore, 
should the queen, abandoning the virtuous king, her lord, follow 
me like a widowed woman ? O Goddess, grant me permission 
to leave for the forest whilst thou dost recite the Peace Chant, 
that my vow may be accomplished. 
" Like King Yayati of old who returned to heaven, inspired 
by his love of truth, I, too, shall return. O Mother, I dare not 
208 
AYODHYA KANDA 
disobey my father for the sake of a mere kingdom ! Life is brief 
and I have no desire for the rulership of the world through 
the sacrifice of virtue.*' 
The mighty Rama thus acquainting his mother with his 
intention of entering the forest as demanded by Kaikeyi, circum ambulated the Queen Kaushalya, fixing his heart on his 
departure. 
CHAPTER 22 
He appeals to Shri Lakshmana not to grieve 
Shki RAMACHAMDRA then turned to Shri Lakshmana, who unable 
to endure his distress, full of wrath against Kaikeyi, his eyes 
distorted, was breathing heavily like a mighty elephant. Address ing him in terms of affection as a beloved brother and friend, 
patiently calming his fears, Rama said : " O Brother, give up 
grief and anger and arm thyself with patience, forgetting the 
preparations made for mine installation, make thyself ready for 
my departure to the forest. O Lakshmana, prepare with the 
same zeal as thou didst prepare for my coronation. The mind 
of my mother, Kaikeyi, is clouded with suspicion on account 
of my proposed enthronement, therefore, O Lakshmana, act so 
that her suspicions may be allayed. O Brother, Mother Kaikeyi 
believes thou wilt use force to place me on the throne. This 
I cannot endure, nor can I suffer her to experience anxiety. 
At no time, do I recollect that I have voluntarily given cause 
for offence to my parents. O Lakshmana, let us relieve the 
apprehensions of our royal father, ever truthful and valiant but 
now fearful lest his future life be jeopardized. If I do not 
abandon the desire for the crown, the distress caused to the 
heart of the king, at the violation of bis vow, will be mine also. 
O Lakshmana, because of this, I desire to enter the forest 
without delay, abandoning the project of mine installation. 
Thinking her purpose accomplished, Queen Kaikeyi will to-day, 
if I depart for the forest, cause her son Bharata to be summoned 
209 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
and will make over the kingdom to him with joy. The heart 
of Kaikeyi will find no rest till I, dressed in a deer skin, with 
matted locks, enter the forest. I cannot grieve her, who has 
urged me to go to the forest and contributed to my resolution, 
therefore> I will depart without delay. O Lakshmana, the 
acquisition of the kingdom is not part of my destiny. If 
providence had favoured me, Kaikeyi would not have desired 
to send me to the forest. O Dear One, thou knowest no 
distinction was made by me between my three mothers, nor 
has Kaikeyi looked on me as different from Prince Bharata, 
but to-day to frustrate my coronation and send me into exile, 
she has uttered cruel and pitiless words. This is the will of 
God and nought else. Had it not been so, how should Kaikeyi 
the daughter of a king, of gentle disposition and noble nature, 
speak thus like a vulgar woman in the presence of her husband ? 
Whatever is inscrutable to man should be known to be the 
decree of providence ; even Brahma cannot evade the conse quences of karma.1 It is this unalterable and fixed decree that 
has created the dissension between Kaikeyi and me, not to be 
understood by man. 
" Pleasure, pain, fear, anger, profit and loss, life and death, 
and similar matters come into being as a result of our karma. 
Even the sages practising great austerities, prompted by their 
karma, abandoning asceticism have been swept away by 
concupiscence and avarice. This sudden happening, never 
apprehended, this frustration of a well-devised plan is the work 
of karma. Therefore, I in no wise regret my resolve nor the 
cancellation of my coronation. Do thou also abandon grief 
and following me forget the preparations for the coronation. 
O Lakshmana, with these vessels of water brought hither for 
mine installation, let my dedication to the ascetic life, be made. 
Yet what use have I now for these sacred waters ? From now 
on, I shall draw water with mine own hands for every ritual. 
" O Lakshmana, do not grieve that the installation ceremony 
remains unperformed. We know by reason and discernment 
that there is little difference between ruling a kingdom and living 
in a forest. O Lakshmana, do not for an instant blame Queen 
1 Karma — The law governing the behaviour of matter in all its grow and 
subtle form*. 
AYODHYA KAND;A 
Kaikcyi for obstructing my coronation ; prompted by karma, 
men say what is unlawful." 
chapter 23 
Shri Lakskmana offers to defeat all those who obstruct Shri 
Rama's installation 
Instructed by his brother, Lakshmana, his head bowed, was 
filled with distress on account of Shri Rama's impending 
departure, yet glad to learn the secret of dharma. Remaining 
in the cave of anger awhile, breathing like a snake provoked in 
its hole, his frowning mien resembling an enraged lion, swaying 
like the trunk of an elephant, with quivering limbs, averting 
his gaze, he addressed his elder brother, saying : " O Brother, 
in this evil hour, thou art subject to a great delusion. Ill-timed 
is this assertion that disobedience to a parent is contrary to 
dharma. It does not become one virtuous as thou art to speak 
thus. Thou, a leader among warriors, canst control thy fate, 
yet like a weak man thou speakest of it as irrevocable. Dost 
thou respect these wicked beings,1 O Virtuous One ? Dost thou 
not know how many deceivers appear as righteous men ? Take 
note how the king and Kaikeyi for selfish ends deceive thee 
and send thee into exile. If this matter of the boons granted 
to Kaikeyi were true, then why was it not revealed 'ere the 
preparations for thy installation were made ? If it can be said 
it was done in error, then that error is a calamity. It will cause 
dissension among the people. How can the younger take 
precedence over the elder in matters of state ? I cannot suffer 
this, O Great Hero, pardon me. This law thou praiseth, by 
which thy mind is governed, is incomprehensible to me. Thou 
who art powerful, why must thou submit to Kaikeyi ? Wilt 
thou obey the unjust command of thy father, contrary to the law 
of dharma ? Dost thou not perceive their duplicity, in frus trating thine installation under the pretext of granting a boon ? 
1 The King and Kaikeyi. 
211 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
I consider the pursuit of such a course to be worthy of 
condemnation. This is die reason for my distress. Though 
our parents, the King and Kaikeyi, desire to harm thee and are 
swayed by passion, who, except thee, would countenance then design ? Yet thou attributest this matter to the decree of fate. 
This action is unpleasing to me. Let the weak and the cowardly 
trust in so uncertain a fate, heroes and men of patient resolve, 
do not accept the dictates of karma. He, who by his own 
endeavours, conquers fate, never suffers. Let it be seen to-day 
whether fate or exertion prevail. 
"That destiny1 which prevents thine installation, which 
resembles an elephant refusing to respond to the goad, and 
having broken its fetters, is wandering about unchecked, that 
decree will I conquer by my prowess. 
'* Neither the guardians of the four quarters, nor all the 
dwellers in the Three Worlds, united as one, can prevent thine 
installation, how much less then, my father ? Those who have 
planned thine exile, shall themselves pass fourteen years in exile. 
I will frustrate the hopes of my father and Kaikeyi, who, 
depriving thee of the kingdom, seek to enthrone Bharata. The 
power of karma will not bring such adversity to those opposed 
to us as my valour shall inflict on them ! After ruling a 
thousand years, do thou retire to the forest, leaving thy sons 
to govern the kingdom, then, like our ancestors, who, becoming 
aged, withdrew to a hermitage, do thou continue to live in the 
forest. Formerly, kings in their declining years, giving over 
their subjects to the governance of their sons and grandsons, 
used to retire to the forest as ascetics. If, O Rama, thou fearest 
to rule against the behests of the king, thinking the administration 
would be insecure, I will protect thy kingdom as the shore 
protects the earth from the inroads of the sea. If I fail, may I 
never be called a hero ! Now fix thy mind on thine enthronement 
with these auspicious preparations ; singlehanded I can effect 
the defeat of the kings who obstruct thine installation. These 
two arms of mine are not for show, nor is my bow a mere 
decoration. My sword was never meant to dangle at my side, 
nor are my arrows designed to be kept in the quiver ! All these 
axe dedicated to the task of destroying the enemy. I will not 
* The remit of one's karma. 
AYODHYA KANDA 
brook the existence of my foes. With my keen bright sword, I 
will hew their bodies to pieces, even if it be Indra himself. I will 
cut to pieces elephants, horses and men with my sword, creating 
large heaps and rendering advance impossible. To-day, my 
enemies shall fall like clouds rent by lightning. Donning the 
godha,1 lifting up my bow, I shall strike the enemy with many 
shafts and large numbers of them with a single arrow. I shall 
destroy innumerable soldiers, horses and elephants by piercing 
their most vulnerable parts with my shafts. To-day I shall 
demonstrate the power of my weapons and establish thy 
sovereignty. To-day these two arms accustomed to be adorned 
with ornaments and sandalpaste and used to distributing charity 
and to protecting friends, shall prove their prowess by opposing 
those who obstruct thine installation. O Ramachandra, I am 
thy servant, tell me who is thy foe and command me to oppose 
him so that severing them from their fame and friends, the 
kingdom be placed in thy hands." 
Shri Ramachandra, hearing the words of Lakshmana, wiping 
away his tears, consoled him, saying : " O Dear One, know 
my chief valour to be obedience to the will of my father ; it 
behoves the virtuous to fulfil their father's command." 
CHAPTER 24 
The queen realises she has no power to restrain Shri Rama's 
resolution 
Seeing the righteous Ramachandra determined to obey his sire, 
Queen Kaushalya, her eyes filled with tears and her throat 
choked with emotion, said : — 
" O Rama, thou hast never experienced hardship. Fruit of 
my womb and the seed of King Dasaratha, thou, following 
dharma, hast ever spoken sweetly to all, how wilt thou be able 
1 A guard of leather and metal, worn on the left arm to protect it from the 
bow itnng. 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
to endure living in the forest? He whose servants live on 
sweetmeats and butter, how will that Rama of mine be able 
to live on roots and fruit? Who will not feel insecurity, 
knowing King Dasaratha to have banished his illustrious and 
virtuous son ? If he acts thus to such a son, what of myself ? 
If Ramachandra, beloved of all, is compelled to enter the forest, 
then undoubtedly destiny (past karma) rules our joys and 
sorrows. O Child, the fire of grief in my heart, fanned by the 
wind of thine absence, fed on lamentation and affliction ; 
stimulated by tears, emitting the smoke of anxiety, will utterly 
consume and destroy me, like a forest fire at the end of winter 
reduces the bushes, creepers and grass to ashes. O Child, as 
a cow runs after its calf, so shall I follow thee wheresoever 
thou goest." 
Rama, listening to the sorrowful speech of Queen Kaushalya, 
replied : " O Mother, the king is sorely distressed by the deceit 
of Kaikeyi, and I also must leave him when I go to the forest. 
The Maharajah will not survive if thou also come with me. 
No more cruel act can a woman perform than to leave her 
husband ; it is not to be countenanced. As long as my father 
lives, it is for thee to serve him. This eternal dharma must 
be followed by thee." 
The virtuous maharani listening to the advice of Shri 
Ramachandra, he who overcame difficulties with ease, replied 
submissively to him : ** O My Son, thy words are true.*' 
Shri Rama then addressed her who was suffering deep distress, 
saying : " O Goddess, both thou and I must obey my father. 
He is first my preceptor, secondly my father, thirdly thy husband 
and finally the protector, master and lord of us all. Having 
cheerfully passed fourteen years in the forest, I will return and 
do thy bidding." 
Queen Kaushalya, her eyes brimming with tears, she who 
did not merit suffering, answered Shri Ramachandra, saying : 
" O My Son, how shall I endure dwelling with my rivals ? 
If thou art resolved to enter the forest at the command of thy 
father, then like a wild doe take me with thee." 
To his weeping mother, Shri Rama replied : "As long as 
a woman lives, she should consider her husband as her master 
and her lord. The king is our master, how should we be 
ai4 
AYODHYA KANDA 
masterless while the king lives ? Bharata also is virtuous, 
humble and devoted to the good of all. He will undoubtedly 
treat thee with respect and not oppose thee. When I am gone, 
let not the king surfer on account of my separation, and let him 
not be overcome by this great grief. The king is now aged, 
it becomes thee to serve him with every care. Even a virtuous 
woman, devoted to piety and fasting, if negligent towards her 
consort, comes to a sinner's state, but she who is devoted to 
her lord attains heaven. The woman who is ever devoted to 
her husband and ever ready to seek his welfare, attains heaven, 
even if she has not worshipped any god. Service of the husband 
is a duty sanctioned by ancient tradition, by the Veda and by 
the scriptural law. O Mother, undertake those rituals promoting 
universal peace and serve the gods with floral offerings. For 
my sake, give hospitality to pious and learned brahmins and 
await my return. Performing the discipline of daily purification, 
give up savoury foods, and existing on simple fare, serve the 
king. Should the king still be living when I return, truly it 
shall be well." 
The queen, her eyes suffused with tears, distressed on account 
of the impending separation from her son, replied to Shri 
Ramachandra : " O Child, thy resolution to enter the forest 
being fixed, I have no power to restrain thee. O Hero, fate 
is irrevocable, therefore, enter the forest without anxiety, 
mayest thou be happy. On thy return, my sufferings will cease. 
O Auspicious One, when thou returnest on the fulfilment of 
thy vow, rendering back the debt thou owest to thy father, 
my joy will be complete. None can comprehend the warp of 
fate.1 It is fate that urges thee to oppose me. O Prince, now 
depart and return safely, promoting my delight with a pure 
heart. O Child; I pray that thou wilt return soon, and that I 
shall behold thee in robes of bark with matted locks." 
Queen Kaushalya, knowing that Ramachandra was eager to 
enter the forest, reverently gave him her blessings, uttering 
auspicious words. 
1 The result of accumulated thought and action through counties lives. 
215 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 25 
The queen gives her blessing and the brahmins pronounce 
the benediction 
Restraining her grief, sipping a few drops of pure water from 
her hand, Queen Kaushalya, purifying herself, performed the 
benedictory rites for the well-being of Rama. She said : " O 
Prince of the House of Raghu, I may not restrain thee, therefore 
now depart, and on thy return, tread the path of the virtuous. 
O Great Raghu, may that dharma which thou hast practised 
with courage, preserve thee. May the gods thou hast worshipped 
in the temples and on the highways and the great sages protect 
thee. May the weapons given thee by the wise Vishwamitra 
protect thee. O Mighty One, preserved by this service rendered 
by thee to thy father, mother and the truth, mayest thou live 
long. May the sacrificial kusha grass, sacred grass rings, altars, 
temples, sacred places, mountains, trees of every kind, lakes, 
rivers, birds, snakes and lions ever protect thee ! May Brahma, 
Pusha,1 Aryama,* Indra and Lokapala3 all be auspicious to thee ! 
May the seasons, the months, the weeks, the years, the day 
and night favour thee! O My Son, may holy meditation, 
concentration and dharma, together with the injunctions, 
ordained in the Veda protect thee ! May the Lord Sanat Kumara,4 Mahadevas with Uma,9 Brihaspati, the seven holy 
Rishis7 and Shri Narada bless thee ! May all the perfect beings 
adored by me, ever protect thee ! May the mountain ranges, 
the seas as also Varuna their lord, space, the earth, the rivers 
and the stars with their deities, the planets and the day and night 
protect thee in the forest ! May the six seasons, the twelve 
months, the whole year and the divisions of the hour promote 
thy happiness ! May the devas, the adhityas8 and the asuras, 
wandering in the forest in the guise of hermits, protect thee ! 
1 Pusha or Pushan — the Sun. 
1 Aryama — chief of the pittris or ancestors. 
* Lokapala — guardian of the four quarters. 
* Sanat-K.umara — mind-born son of Shri Brahma. 
1 Mahadeva— Great God, a title of Lord Shiva. 
* Uma— Parvati, Shiva's consort. 
' Seven Holy Rishis — Angira, Atri, Adhitya, Kraft, Poulastya, Vaiishtha and 
Vasu. 
* Adhityas — sun gods. 
2X6 
AYODHYA KANDA 
" May no rakshasas,1 pisachas.,2 those who practise cruelty, 
that which is ill-omened and the eaters of flesh, ever cause thee 
injury ! May no monkeys, scorpions, gadflies, serpents or 
reptiles approach thee ! O My Son, may no elephant, lion, 
tiger, bear or beast with awful jaws, or buffaloes and those with 
dangerous horns, be hostile to thee ; propitiated by me, may 
they not cause thee injury in the forest ! May thy way be 
blessed, may thine undertaking be crowned with success ! O 
My Son, mayest thou ever find fruits, roots and the means of 
subsistence ! Mayest thou ever tread the forest unhindered ! 
May all things between heaven and earth protect thee at all 
times ! May Indra, the Moon, the Sun, Kuvera and Yama 
worshipped by thee, protect thee from thy foes ! May Agni, 
Vayu, Dhuma,3 and the sacred formulas, taught by the Rishis, 
protect thee when inadvertently contacting the untouchables ! 
May the Lord of the world, Brahma, Vishnu and the gods not 
mentioned by me, protect thee in the forest ! " 
Then the illustrious Kaushalya worshipped the gods with 
flowers and sandalwood, offering oblations and kindling the 
sacred fire for the health and peace of Shri Ramachandra with 
the aid of the pious brahmins, learned in rituals. With butter, 
white flowers, sacrificial fuel and mustard seed prepared for 
the oblation by Queen Kaushalya, the learned and pious 
brahmins performed the Hawan* ceremony for the welfare of 
Rama. 
Then the mother of Rama asked the brahmins to pronounce 
the benediction and present the oblations to the Lokopalas, the 
priests receiving the remainder. With honey, curds, rice and 
clarified butter, the brahmins pronounced their blessings and 
the queen having offered them abundant alms and whatsoever 
they desired, addressed Rama, saying : " O Rama, may the 
same blessing bestowed on Indra on the destruction of Bratra sura6 be thine. May the blessing bestowed on Garuda6 when 
conveying away the amrita,7 be thine, by the power of my 
Rakshasas — demons. 
Pisachas — ghosts. 
Dhuma — god of smoke. 
Hawan — an ancient fire ceremony. 
Bratrasura or Vratrasura or Vritra — an asura killed by Indra. 
Garuda — king of birds, vehicle of Shri Vishnu. 
Amrita — the nectar of immortality. 
217 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
worship of Vinata.1 May the blessing attendant on Indra, the 
bearer of the mace, at the time of the raising of the amrita from 
the ocean at the instance of his mother, Aditi, be thine. O 
My Son, may the good fortune attendant on the blessed 
Trivikrama3 when measuring the world in three strides, be 
thine also. O Rama, may the seasons, the ocean, the islands, 
the Vedas and the cardinal points contribute to thy happiness." 
Thus, scattering rice over the head of her son, die large-eyed 
Queen Kaushalya, applying sandal paste to his forehead, 
bestowed on Rama the healing wood ' Vishalya Karina '. For 
his protection, the queen silently repeated the mantrams, and 
though her heart was filled with distress, appeared as one 
content. Embracing her son, and kissing his head, she said : 
" O My Son, now go in peace. Mayest thou, having fulfilled 
the commands of the king, return in health to Ayodhya. O 
Child, my joy will be complete, when I behold thee at thy 
coronation. My troubles ended and my ambitions fulfilled, 
on thy return from exile, beholding thee occupying the throne, 
I shall know supreme happiness. Having fulfilled the injunc tions of thy father, thou wilt return, and I, beholding thee clad 
in royal apparel with innumerable gems, shall then find peace. 
O Prince, now depart and accomplish the desire of Princess Sita 
and me." 
The queen reciting the Peace Chant, her eyes suffused with 
tears, embracing her son again and again, circumambulated him, 
gazing on his face. 
Touching her feet repeatedly, the illustrious Ramachandra, 
resplendent in the light of the perfection of Self,8 left for the 
palace of Princess Sita. 
» Vinata— Garuda'j mother. 
* Trivikrama — Another name of Vamana, the holy Dwarf, i 
of Shri Vishnu. 
1 Self— the Divine in man. 
2X8 
AYODHYA KANDA 
CHAPTER 26 
Skri Rama acquaints Princess Sita of his resolution 
SHRI Ramachandra, ever devoted to virtue, taking leave of his 
mother, ready to enter the forest, passed through the crowded 
streets, by his excellent qualities inspiring peace in the hearts 
of the multitude. 
The ascetic Princess Sita, not being acquainted with what 
had happened, her mind full of joy in the thought of the coming 
coronation of her consort, worshipping the gods and proficient 
in every duty, awaited the approach of her lord with a happy heart. 
Meantime, Rama dressed in his customary apparel, his head 
bowed in humility, entered the palace filled with joyful and 
richly attired persons. 
Seeing Ramachandra unadorned, the princess was filled with 
consternation and fear, and rose trembling from her seat. 
Rama beholding the princess, dearer than life to him, could not 
restrain his distress. Sita, seeing the countenance of Rama, 
sad, pale and moist with anguish, addressed him : " O My 
Lord, what is this ? To-day, the Pushya planet and the moon 
are in conjunction, and Brihaspati in the ascendant, this is the 
time fixed for thy coronation by the holy brahmins, why art 
thou thus distressed ? Why do I not behold the canopy, pure 
as foam, set with a hundred stars over thy head ? Why are 
the chamaras, white as the moon or the swan, not waving to 
and fro over thee ? O Great One, why do I not hear the bards 
to-day eloquently voicing thy praise, or the pundits reciting 
the Chant of Peace ? 
" Why have the learned brahmins not anointed thee with 
honey, and curds as a mark of thine enthronement ? Why art 
thou not attended by ministers, citizens and courtiers sumptu- 
ously attired ? Why do four swift steeds with golden trappings, 
fleet of foot, not precede thee ? I do not behold the great 
elephant resembling a cloud, possessed of every auspicious mark,' 
in thy tram? Why dost thou appear downcast when the 
preparations for thy coronation are completed ? O My Lord, 
why does thy countenance manifest no signs of joy ? " 
Hearing the sorrowful words of the Princess Sita, Rama 
219 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
replied : " O Sita, my honoured father has commanded me 
to go into exile. O Princess, born of an illustrious family, 
acquainted with the law of dharma and eminent in virtue, hear, 
while I tell thee what has befallen me. Long ago my father, 
a lover of truth, granted two boons to my mother Kaikeyi. 
Beholding the preparations for my coronation, Kaikeyi demanded 
the fulfilment of her boons and has now gained ascendency over 
his mind. In accordance with the two boons granted to her, 
it is mine to pass fourteen years in the Dandaka forest and 
Prince Bharata to be installed as regent. I am now going into 
exile and have come to bid thee farewell. Let no words in 
praise of me be repeated to Prince Bharata, lest he withhold 
his protection from thee. It is for thee to submit to his will 
for the sake of thy support The king has conferred the regency 
on Prince Bharata forever. It behoves thee to act in such 
a way that he be not displeased with thee. O Wise One, now 
I go to the forest in obedience to my father's behest, remain 
here with a quiet heart. O Sinless One, when dressed as a 
hermit I leave for the forest, then do thou also cease to adorn 
thyself. Rising early, do thou worship the gods according to 
the prescribed rituals, then, approaching my father and mother, 
offer obeisance to them. My mother, Queen Kaushalya, having 
grown old, is afflicted on account of my departure, it becomes 
thee to serve her with respect. My other mothers should be 
honoured and served by thee like Queen Kaushalya, their hearts 
are also full of love towards me. like my own mother 
Kaushalya, they have also cherished me, therefore I deem them 
worthy of the same honour. My brothers Bharata and Shat rughna should be regarded by thee as thy brothers or thy 
sons. It behoves thee never to provoke Prince Bharata, from 
now ruler of the kingdom and chief of the family. Served 
with sincerity, a king is pleased, but if provoked, he becomes 
full of wrath. A monarch renounces his own offspring if 
they oppose him and receives even strangers, as friends, who 
have promoted his welfare. O Kalyani, obeying King 
Bharata, remain here, seeking his good. O Dear One, I shall 
enter the great forest, it behoves thee to remain here; I 
charge thee to act in such a manner that no one will be 
displeased." 
AYODHYA KANDA 
CHAPTER 27 
She entreats Rama to allow her to accompany him 
The sweet-speaking Sita, worthy of Rama's love, thus being 
instructed to remain in Ayodhya, though filled with affection, 
indignantly replied : " O Offspring of a great king, O Rama, 
how canst thou speak in such wise? O Prince, thy words 
evoke laughter. O Chief of Men, father, mother, son and 
daughter-in-law live according to their merit and dependent 
on it, but a wife enjoys the fortune of her husband since she 
is a part of himself. I am therefore entitled to share thy 
father's command and also go into exile. 
" The happiness of a woman depends on her husband, neither 
father, mother, son, relative or companion avail her at death ; 
in this world and in the other world, the husband alone is her 
all-in-all. If thou to-day depart for the forest, I will precede 
thee on foot, clearing the thorns and kusha grass from thy path. 
0 Hero, relinquishing anger and pride, take me with thee 
without hesitation. There is no fault in me that merits my 
remaining here, without thee. The joy experienced by lords 
of men whether dwelling in a palace or transported in an aerial 
chariot through the heavens or possessing the eightfold psychic 
powers, is far inferior to the joy of the wife in the service of 
her lord. My royal father has instructed me fully in the duties 
of a wife and, therefore, I have no need of further instruction 
in the matter. Assuredly I shall accompany thee to the forest, 
uninhabited by men, filled with savage beasts, such as bears 
and bulls. O My Hero, I will dwell in the forest as happily 
as in the palace of my father, having no anxiety in the three 
worlds save the service of my spouse. O Hero, I will wander 
with thee in the forest according to the ancient spiritual 
ordinance, free from desire for pleasure, traversing the honey scented woodland. O Lord of my Life, since thou canst 
protect and support innumerable people, canst thou not more 
easily protect me? without doubt to-day I shall enter the 
forest with thee, O Fortunate Prince, none can break my resolve. 
1 shall live happily on fruits and roots with thee in the forest, 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
causing thee no anxiety. Under the protection of one as wise 
as thee, O Lord, I desire to enjoy the beauty of lakes, mountains 
and rivers without hindrance. O Rama, I long with thee to see 
the beautiful lakes where swans and kavandava birds1 play and 
charming lotuses bloom. There will I bathe with thee, O My 
Lotus-eyed Lord, sporting there with thee. Thus would I pass 
a thousand years with thee, the happiness enjoyed in thy 
company renders even the delights of heaven distasteful to me. 
O Prince, without thee, heaven itself would not please me. I 
long to enter the forest with thee where deer, monkeys and 
elephants roam. O Prince, serving thy holy feet, I will pass 
the time there as happily as in my royal father's house. 
Recogni2ing no other, in thee my mind finds its highest delight ; 
separated from thee, I shall surely die. O Master, be gracious 
enough to take me with thee, assuredly I shall not burden thee." 
Shri Ramachandra hearing the humble and piteous words 
of Shri Sita, unwilling to let the princess accompany him, 
sought to dissuade her by describing the hardships of a forest 
life. 
CHAPTER 28 
Shri Rama seeks to dissuade Her 
The virtuous Ramachandra, devoted to truth reflecting on the 
hardships to be borne in the forest, in spite of Sita's entreaty 
was unwilling to grant her request. 
Once more, he addressed the weeping Ska, insisting she 
should not accompany him, saying : " O Sita, thou art nobly 
born and devoted to the practice of virtue ; remain here 
continuing to act righteously. O Frail Princess, act according 
to my will. Life in the forest is fraught with misery, O Sita, 
relinquish the thought of sharing my exile, many are the dangers 
there. The forest is named 'Antara ', meaning it is unfit for 
human habitation. For thine own well-being, I advise thee 
to remain here ; in the forest there is no comfort The rivers 
1 Kavandava bird — a species of duck. 
222 
AYODHYA KANDA 
issuing from the mountains are difficult to cross, the lions 
roaring in the mountain caves strike terror in the heart and 
render the forest perilous ; therefore, remain here. O Sita, 
many wild beasts wandering at will in the forest may assail thee, 
therefore life there is full of danger. The deep marshes and 
the rivers infested with crocodiles are difficult to cross, even 
an elephant may find them impassable. Many savage elephants 
wander here and there j assuredly the forest is replete with perils. 
Waterless are the paths covered with thorns and poisonous 
creepers, there the hoarse cry of wild fowl re-echoes ; the forest 
is a source of suffering. Wearied by journeying the traveller 
finds no silken pillows nor a soft couch, but at night must sleep 
on the bare earth, his bed the fallen leaves ; verily the forest 
is a source of suffering ! O Sita, in the forest, there is nought 
to eat save the fruit that has fallen from the trees ; with this 
the traveller must be satisfied day and night, therefore the forest 
is a source of suffering ! O Daughter of Mithila, fasting to 
the utmost extent, with matted locks, wearing robes of bark, 
one must constantly worship the devas and pittris and offer 
respectful hospitality to the unexpected guest. Thrice daily 
must ablutions be performed by those who live according to 
the prescribed ordinance, therefore, the forest is a source of 
suffering. O Youthful Princess, it is necessary to make offerings 
of flowers on the altars, plucked by one's own hand, as ordained 
by the sages. A dweller in the forest must be satisfied with 
whatever food he can obtain, therefore the forest is a source 
of suffering. Great storms visit the forest, covering it with 
darkness by day; constant hunger and many other perils 
prevail there, therefore is it a source of suffering. O Beautiful 
One, great snakes and pythons dwell in the forest, serpents 
as tortuous as the currents of the river live in the waters 
and obstruct the traveller's path, therefore the forest is a 
source of suffering. O Delicate Princess, scorpions, poisonous 
reptiles, hornets and mosquitoes afflict one constantly in the 
forest; therefore the forest is a source of suffering. O Charming 
Princess, the forest is filled with briars, harsh grass and gnarled 
trees obstructing the way, it is therefore a source of suffering. 
Life in the forest is full of conditions adverse to the body and 
manifold dangers, it is therefore a source of suffering. O Sita, 
223 Q 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
a dweller in the forest must relinquish anger and avarice and 
practise severe penances, nor must fear visit him in the midst of 
alarms. 
" Do not, therefore, consider entering the forest which is 
not meant to be thy lot. Reflecting carefully, I see nought 
but suffering in the forest for thee." 
Thus Rama disclosed his mind to Sita and sought to dissuade 
her from entering the forest, but the princess, sorely distressed, 
unable to consent to his counsel, then made answer. 
CHAPTER 29 
Sita continues her entreaties but the prince is unwilling 
to consent to her departure 
Shri Sita hearing Rama's words, was greatly distressed and 
with tears coursing down her cheeks, answered in a low voice : — 
" O Rama, the sufferings of a life in the forest described 
by thee, will, through my love for thee be transmuted to joys. 
Deer, bear, lions, elephants, sarabhas,1 birds, bulls and other 
woodland beasts, on beholding thy matchless countenance, 
will flee away stricken with terror. All fear thee, O Lord ! 
Instructed by my elders to remain in thy company, it behoves 
me to go with thee ; separated from thee, I cannot live. When 
near to thee, O Rama, even Indra the King of the Devas 
dare not do me injury. O Rama, thou hast taught me 
that a woman must not be parted from her lord. O Most 
Wise Lord, long ago, in my father's house, I was told by one 
conversant with the movements of the planets that I should 
have to dwell in the forest. O Mighty One, since I was told 
by that brahmin skilled in occult sciences, of my life in the forest 
with thee, I have looked forward to the time with joy. O, what 
felicity to live with thee in the forest ! O Dear One, thou 
must grant me permission to go to the forest with thee. I must 
go with thee, it cannot be otherwise, thus shall I prove my 
1 Sarabha — a legendary animal with right legs. 
224 
AYODHYA KANDA 
fidelity, enjoined by my elders. The time for the fulfilment 
of the brahmin's prophecy is at hand. O Hero, I know all the 
miseries of life in the forest, but it is those of unsubdued mind 
who suffer them. While still living in my father's house, a pious 
and saintly woman predicted in the presence of my mother, 
that I should live in the forest. O My Lord, formerly I have 
begged thee to let me sport with thee in the woods. The time 
is now come, grant my prayer and let me go with thee 1 O 
Prince, may the undertaking be propitious. Glad am I to 
accompany thee to the forest, to serve thee there will be my 
great delight. O Lord, relinquishing envy, accompanying thee 
in the forest, all my sins will be washed away through my 
devotion to thee. I have no other god but thee, if death 
overtakes me I shall not experience happiness in the other world 
without thee. I have heard from the brahmins that a woman 
given by her father according to the sacred ordinance to a man, 
becomes his wife in this world and also in the other world. 
O Prince of Beautiful Locks, in perfect devotion to thee, filled 
with humility, regarding pain and pleasure as equal, sharing 
thy austerities, permit me to accompany thee. If thou art still 
unwilling to take me, a woman distressed, to the forest, then I 
will seek death by poison or drowning." 
In this wise, Sita entreated Rama to let her accompany him, 
but Still the great prince was unwilling to consent. Seeing 
Rama disinclined to grant her request, Sita was filled with grief, 
and her hot tears fell, moistening the earth. Shri Rama, seeing 
the princess flushed with anxiety and indignation still sought 
to divert her from her purpose. 
CHAPTER 30 
Seeing her fixed resolve Shri Rama grants her request 
Shri Rama again stressed the dangers of the forest and sought 
to persuade Sita not to accompany him ; but Sita, with fixed 
resolve, trembling with fear yet urged by love and pride, spoke 
as in jest : "O Rama, if my father the Lord of Mithila, had 
225 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
known thee as a man in form only, but a woman at heart, he 
would never have united me to thee. Alas ! that men in 
ignorance speak of Rama as resembling the sun in splendour, 
when in reality he is not so. O Rama, what makes thee sad ? 
Whence thy fear that thou, abandoning me who am devoted 
to thee, shouldst go to the forest ? O Hero, know me to be 
to thee what Savitri1 was to Satyavanta, the son of the valiant 
King Dyumatsena.* O Sinless Prince, I have never looked on 
any, even in thought, but thee, nor do I resemble those women 
dishonouring their family's name who look on other men ; 
therefore, let me go with thee. 
" O Rama, why dost thou desire to surrender me to Bharata, 
I, who, long resident with thee, thy youthful spouse, am solely 
devoted to thee ? Whether living as an ascetic or hermit or 
residing in heaven, I will follow thee. Journeying in the forest 
will not weary me ; by following thee, I shall experience the 
same delight as walking in the gardens or sporting with thee 
in the woods. O Rama, in thy company the thorny briars 
such as kusha, sarpat and shara will seem to me as soft as 
deer skin. The dust raised by the storm, covering my body, 
will be as sandalpaste to me. I shall share with thee the couch 
of grass with the same delight as a bed of silken down. What 
ever leaves, roots or fruits thou dost bring for me will be as sweet 
and satisfying as ambrosia. Enjoying with thee, the fruits and 
flowers of every season, I shall not call to mind my mother, 
rather and home. No anxiety will be caused to thee by my 
presence in the forest, neither shall my sustenance be a burden 
to thee. I tell thee the forest will be heaven in thy company, 
and without thee even the palace will be hell to me. Be 
pleased, therefore, to let me go to the forest with thee. I 
fear nought in the forest, but if thou still refuseth to take me 
with thee, then will I end my life by poison ; never will I 
dwell among strangers. O My Lord, without thee nothing is 
left to me but death ; abandoned by thee, it were better to die. 
I cannot endure the grief of thy separation even for an hour, 
how then shall I suffer it for fourteen years ? " 
1 Savitri — daughter of King Aswapati, who rescued her husband Satyavanta 
from the God of Death and restored him to life. The full story is found in 
riii- Mahabharata Vana Purana. 
» DyumaUena — Prince of S'alva. 
226 
AYODHYA KANDA 
Thus Sita, lamenting and embracing Shri Rama, wept aloud. 
From her eyes, like a she elephant wounded by poisoned arrows, 
long-restrained tears issued, as fire is kindled by the friction 
of wood. Crystal drops fell from her eyes as water slips from 
the petals of the lotus flowers. The face of the princess 
resembling the full moon, withered by the fire of intense grief, 
looked like a lotus withdrawn from water. 
Shri Ramachandra, taking Sita, afflicted and fainting, in his 
arms, spoke to her in the following wise : " O Devi, I do not 
desire even to enter heaven if it causes thee pain ! Nought 
do I fear ! Like Brahma, I am wholly fearless ! Though able 
to protect thee in every way, yet not fully knowing thy mind, 
I declined to let thee share my exile. Seeing thou art destined 
to share my exile, I do not desire to abandon thee, as a man 
of virtuous conduct determines not to sacrifice his good name. 
0 Beautiful One, following the example of the good of yore, 
1 shall act in the same manner ; do thou follow me as Suvarchala1 
follows the sun. O Daughter of King Janaka, I am not entering 
the forest by my own desire, but to obey the injunctions of my 
father. O Devi, it is the duty of a son to obey his parents, 
I could not endure life if I failed to observe my father's 
command. Fate is invisible, who can control it, but the parents 
and the spiritual preceptor are visible deities and their orders 
must be obeyed. What in the world is so sacred as the worship 
of that which grants dharma, prosperity and pleasure ? By 
this worship, homage is paid to the three worlds. O Sita, 
observance of truth, charity and sacrifice accompanied by 
suitable offerings (dakshina) is of less avail in obtaining the 
spiritual realm than the service of parents and the Guru. Those 
who serve their parents and the spiritual preceptor obtain 
heaven, wealth, learning and progeny and nothing is impossible 
for them. Those who are devoted to their parents and their 
Guru obtain entrance to heaven and the regions of the devas, 
the gandharvas and Brahma. This is eternal righteousness — to 
obey the command of thy parents, fixed in the practice of truth. 
O Sita, not knowing thy mind, I advised thee not to accompany 
me* but now seeing thy fixed resolve I desire to take thee with 
me. O Princess, whose eyes sparkle like wine, thou art destined 
1 Suvarchala — consort of the Sun. 
227 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
to be my companion, do thou assist me in the performance of 
my duty. It is well that thou didst desire to be with me in 
accordance with the custom of our forbears. O Sita, prepare 
to go into exile without delay ; without thee, even heaven does 
not please me. Bestow thy jewels on the brahmins in charity 
and offer food to the poor ; hasten, make no delay. Give to 
the brahmins, jewels, ornaments, rich apparel, whatever thou 
possessest or is employed for my entertainment, all that is mine 
and thine, couches, coverlets, and vehicles give in charity to 
the brahmins and what remains distribute among the servants." 
Shri Sita, happy at the acquiescence of Prince Rama and 
knowing her departure to be fixed, began to distribute all her 
possessions. Free from anxiety, Sita bestowed on the pious 
brahmins her wealth and all her jewels. 
chapter 3 I 
Shri Lakshmana is resolved to accompany them 
Shri Lakshmana being present, hearing the converse of Rama 
and Sita, was afflicted and unable to restrain his grief, and 
weeping bitterly, spoke as follows : " If thou art resolved to 
enter the forest in which dwell many wild beasts and elephants, 
I will accompany thee with my bow and arrows. I will wander 
with thee in the beautiful forest to the delightful sounds of 
birds and deer abounding there. O Ramachandra, without 
thee I do not care to dwell even in the region of the gods nor 
do I desire immortality or dominion over other abodes." 
Seeing Prince Lakshmana determined to accompany him to 
the forest, Shri Ramachandra sought to dissuade him, but Shri 
Lakshmana answered : " O Brother, having already granted me 
permission to accompany thee, why dost thou now prohibit me ? 
O Sinless One, I would fain know what prevents thee from 
taking me with thee ; my mind is clouded with fears." 
Shri Ramachandra perceiving Lakshmana humbly standing 
before him ready to accompany him, said : " O Lakshmana, 
thou art most dear to me, virtuous, brave and constantly engaged 
228 
AYODHYA KANDA 
in righteous deeds, thou an as dear to me as my life. Thou art 
my younger brother, my servant and my friend. If I grant 
thy request, who will protect the renowned Kaushalya and 
Sumitra in thine absence ? O Brother, the king who granted 
their desires, as a cloud responds to the need of the earth, 
is still under the bondage of pleasure desire. When Kaikeyi, 
the daughter of King Ashvapatti, becomes the queen mother, 
she will not treat her rival consorts well. She will not heed 
the needs and comforts of Queen Kaushalya and Sumitra, nor 
will Bharata, governed by his mother, respect them. Therefore, 
O Lakshmana, remaining here, winning the king's favour, 
render Queen Kaushalya happy. O Brother, heed my instruc tion. O Knower of Dharma, acting thus, thou wilt demonstrate 
thy great devotion to me and also serve thy mother and thereby 
earn great merit. O Lakshmana, reflecting on these words, 
follow my injunction. Bereft of us, our mothers cannot be 
happy." 
Rama having uttered these words, the eloquent Lakshmana 
replied in gentle accents: "O Hero, Bharata will assuredly 
have due regard for the Queens Kaushalya and Sumitra. If 
Bharata, having obtained this mighty kingdom, through evil 
counsel and pride should not protect the queens, I will assuredly 
slay that wicked wretch. O Noble One, Mother Kaushalya 
can well command thousands like me. That illustrious queen 
can easily protect my mother and herself and countless others. 
Make me thy humble attendant, there is no wrong in this. 
Thus shall my highest desire be accomplished and thou shalt 
also find satisfaction. Armed with my bow and arrows, a spade 
and basket, gathering wild fruit and flowers, I shall precede 
thee, pointing out the way. Each day, I shall provide thee with 
ascetic's food, leaves and other suitable offerings. Do thou, 
with the daughter of the King of Videha, enjoy thyself on the 
mountain slopes. Sleeping or waking, I shall do all for thee." 
Shri Ramachandra listened to the loving words of Shri 
Lakshmana with delight and answered : " O Lakshmana, seek 
the permission of thy mother Sumitra, and other relatives to go 
with me. O Lakshmana, fetch, without delay, the dread bows 
given by Vanma himself to Rajarishi Janaka at the time of the 
great sacrifice, also the impenetrable armour and the celestial 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
quivers, the two swords bright as the sun, decorated with gold, 
which King Janaka presented to me at the time of my nuptials 
and which were deposited with care in the house of Shri 
Knowing his exile to be certain, Shri Lakshmana bade farewell 
to his relatives and, bringing the weapons decorated with fresh 
flowers from the home of Shri Vasishtha, presented them to 
Ram . 
Tl" i Shri Ramachandra spoke joyfully to Lakshmana and 
said : " O Handsome Prince, thou art welcome at this hour, 
O Bi ther, I desire to offer all my substance in charity to the 
brahrrins and ascetics, do thou assist me. To those brahmins 
dwellu g in the city devoted to their Guru, to them and to my 
servants distribute all my wealth. Summon the excellent 
Suyajna, the son of Shri Vasishtha, and bid him come here 
without delay. Having duly honoured him and other pious 
brahmins, I shall set out for the forest." 
CHAPTER 32 
Shri Rama bestows fas wealth upon the brahmins, fas friends 
and servants 
Commanded by Shri Rama, Lakshmana went to the house of 
the Rishi Suyajna. Beholding the rishi seated in his sacrificial 
pavilion, he made obeisance to him and said : " Renouncing 
the kingdom, Shri Ramachandra is entering the forest, come 
in all haste to see him embark on this arduous undertaking." 
Having performed his evening devotion, the Rishi Suyajna, 
in company with Prince Lakshmana, entered the beautiful and 
enchanting palace of Shri Rama. Perceiving this knower of 
the Veda tc have come, Shri Rama and Sita rose and with 
joined palms welcomed the rishi with reverence. Offering him 
salutations, Shri Rama bestowed on him alms, beautiful orna ments, jewelled earrings, necklaces of precious gem. "*ning on 
230 
AYODHYA KANDA 
golden thread, amulets and other jewels, and at Sita's instance, 
said : " O Peaceful Rishi, be gracious enough to accept this 
necklace and gold which Shri Sita offers to thy spouse, also 
the bracelets and rings of beaten gold and jewelled bangles ; 
about to enter the forest, Shri Sita offers them to thy wife. 
Accept also this soft pure couch with a coverlet embroidered 
with precious stones, pearls and tassels. This elephant also, 
named Shatranjaya, which my uncle gave me, I present to thee, 
O Great Rishi, together with a thousand golden coins." 
Suyajna, requested by Shri Rama, accepted all the gifts, and 
gave his blessings to Rama, Lakshmana and Sita. Then Rama, 
ever of sweet speech, addressed Lakshmana as Brahma addresses 
Indra, saying : " O Lakshmana, call hither the two excellent 
sons of the Rishi Agastya and Shri Vishwamitra, and honour 
them with gifts of gems. Give to each in abundance as a field 
of corn is visited by rain, a thousand cows, gold, silver, jewels 
and ornaments. To that brahmin, versed in the Taittirya1 
who daily, with devotion, gives his blessing to Queen Kaushalya 
and Sumitra, who is learned in the Vedanta and experienced 
in all matters, give vehicles, silken robes and women attendants, 
so that he may be wholly satisfied. To my confidential adviser, 
Chitaratha, who has served me over a long period, give precious 
jewels, cloths and abundant wealth, and to the brahmacharis, 
my fellow students who study the Veda and are of excellent 
conduct, following no profession, living detached, enjoying good 
food, yet dependent on alms, give to each of these a thousand 
cows. O Lakshmana, bestow on them eighty camels apiece 
loaded with jewels, a thousand bullocks loaded with rice and 
two hundred bulls for tilling the ground. O Lakshmana, give 
them cows so that they may enjoy butter, milk and curds, and 
to each of the brahmacharis attending on Queen Kaushalya give 
a thousand cows and a thousand golden coins and give them 
abundant alms so that my mother may be pleased with us.*' 
Obeying the commands of Prince Rama, Shri Lakshmana 
offered hospitality to the brahmins. Like Kuvera, he gave to 
every brahmin abundant wealth as instructed by his brother. 
Then Shri Rama, seeing his servants standing near him weeping, 
1 Taittirya Sanhita — A collection of teachings from the Black Yajurveda, 
instructions on the performance of sacrifice. 
231 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
bestowed on them sufficient wealth for their entire lives and 
said : " Until I return from die forest, keep watch on the palace 
belonging to Shri Lakshmana and myself." 
Then all wept overcome at the thought of his departure, and 
Rama turning to his treasurer said : " Bring hither my wealth," 
and they heaped quantities of gold and silver before him, 
wonderful to behold. Then Rama with the aid of Lakshmana 
distributed it among the aged, the sick and the needy. 
Now, there was a certain brahmin of the family of Garga, 
whose name was Trijata, whose complexion was pale on account 
of much privation. He, toiling honestly, went to the forest 
daily with spade, axe and plough, maintaining his family on the 
fruits and flowers of the forest. His wife, worn down with 
much poverty, gathering her young children together, addressed 
her husband, saying : "Abandoning thy plough and spade, 
follow my instructions. Go with all speed and approach the 
virtuous Shri Ramachandra, undoubtedly thou shalt obtain 
something there.** 
The brahmin, covering himself with a few wretched rags, 
set out for Shri Rama's palace, his countenance, in lustre,1 
resembling that of the Rishi Bhrigu or Angiras. 
Entering the fifth gate unchallenged, he came to where the 
multitude were assembled and approaching Shri Ramachandra, 
said : " O Illustrious Prince, I am destitute of wealth and having 
many children, subsist on what I find in the forest, look upon 
me with compassion/' 
Shri Rama answered jestingly : " I have still many thousand 
cows not yet bestowed on any. Casting thy staff from this spot, 
I will bestow on thee as many cows as can stand in the space 
between thee and where the staff has fallen." 
Trijata, hearing these words, binding his rags firmly about 
his waist, twirling his staff, threw it away with all his might. 
The staff fell on the further bank of the river Sarayu where 
thousands of royal cows and bulls were grazing. Shri Rama 
ordered all these to be driven to the brahmin's hermitage and 
thus addressed him : " Be not displeased, O Brahmin, that I 
jested with thee ; I desired to test thy great powers. Now, the 
1 It is here implied that the exalted state of the brahmin expressed itself in 
the form of spiritual radiance. 
AYODHYA KANDA 
cattle will be driven to thine abode, ask further whatsoever thou 
desirest. O Brahmin, I will bestow anything thou asketh on 
thee ; all my wealth is to be given to the brahmins. Nothing 
so pleases me as the bestowal of my wealth on brahmins such 
as thou, bringing me renown." 
Then the brahmin Trijata highly gratified, taking the cows, 
departed with his wife, full of power, renown and devotion, 
blessing Shri Ramachandra. 
Thereafter, Rama bestowed the remainder of his wealth, 
acquired through virtue, upon his friends, honouring them with 
marks of respect. There was not a brahmin, servant, pauper 
or beggar that he did not honour with charity at that time. 
chapter 33 
He goes, with Sita and Lakshmana, to King Dasaratha's palace 
Shri Rama, having with Sita, distributed riches in abundance 
to the brahmins in charity, went with Lakshmana and Sita to 
see King Dasaratha, followed by their servants bearing weapons 
adorned with flowers and sandalwood. 
The people of the capital mounting to the top of high buildings 
and the roofs of seven-storied houses to view them, were 
dispirited. Some said: "Behold now Shri Rama, formerly 
attended by four divisions of the army, is to-day only followed by 
Sita and Lakshmana." Others answered, " Shri Rama, having 
tasted the delights of sovereignty and experienced in all the joys 
of life, he who confers wealth on the needy, prompted by duty, 
desires to render fruitful the promise of his sire. To-day, Sita 
never beheld before even by the birds, is exposed to the view 
of the common people on the highway." 
One said : " Surely, the king is possessed of an evil spirit 
or he would never send so dear a son into exile." And another, 
" None ever banished even a traitor, how much less Shri 
Rama who has won the affection of the whole world by his 
excellent conduct ? He is not only virtuous but is innocent, 
233 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
compassionate, learned, truthful, self-controlled and of subdued 
mind. His subjects are as distressed at the thought of his absence 
as the water-fowl during the summer drought. The sufferings 
of Rama, Lord of the world, afflict all, as does a tree uprooted 
from the earth. The glorious Ramachandra, knower of dharma, 
resembles the root of a tree of which the flowers, fruit, 
leaves and branches are the people. Let us, abandoning our 
gardens, fields and homes, sharing his woes, follow Shri Rama. 
Our houses deserted, their treasure removed, their courtyards 
neglected, without grain or stores, their beauty gone, will be 
buried in dust. The devas will no longer visit them, but 
mice scurrying hither and thither will fill them with countless 
holes. Without water, covered with soot, uncleansed, no daily 
rites will be performed there. Fallen in ruins, strewn with 
broken vessels, as if cursed by the king or by divine decree, 
all these, utterly forsaken by us, let Kaikeyi enjoy. 
" We pray that this city abandoned by Shri Rama may be 
converted into a wilderness and the forest where Rama dwells 
become a flourishing city. May the snakes forsake their holes, 
the deer and birds abandon their abode in the mountains and 
valleys, and the lion and elephant leave the forest, in fear of us 
and come and dwell in the capital of Ayodhya. May the city 
abandoned by us, bereft of hay and grain having become the 
resort of serpents, deer and birds, be ruled by Kaikeyi and her 
son and may we, dwelling in the forest with Rama, enjoy fully 
every happiness." 
Shri Rama passing by, hearing their converse, was not in any 
way disturbed, but proceeding slowly, like a young elephant, 
with majestic stride approached the palace of his father which 
resembled the Meru mountain. Shri Rama entering the royal 
palace guarded by seasoned troops, beheld Sumantra standing 
there disconsolate. Shri Rama, with a smiling countenance, 
passing the people who were afflicted and filled with grief, 
approached his father's apartment, desirous of serving him. 
Before entering the royal chamber, he requested Sumantra, 
dejected on account of Rama's departure, to inform the king 
of his arrival. Desirous of fulfilling the command of the 
virtuous monarch, Shri Rama, determined to enter the forest, 
requested Sumantra to make known his presence to the king. 
234 
AYODHYA KANDA 
CHAPTER 34 
The king gives his blessing while the whole palace is filled 
with lamentation 
The dark-complexioned, lotus-eyed Ramachandra, that peerless 
prince, instructed his minister to announce his arrival to the 
king. On this, Sumantra entering the royal apartment, beheld 
the king sorely distressed, lamenting bitterly, like the sun under 
eclipse or a fire buried in ashes or a lake without water. 
The learned Sumantra with joined palms, addressed the 
sorely grieving monarch by praising him in a fitting manner 
and offering obeisance, he said : " Jai to thee, O King." 
Then, falteringly, in low and gentle accents he added : " O 
King, thy son Rama, that Lion among men, is at thy door, 
having distributed his whole wealth to the pious brahmins and 
servants ; now having taken leave of his friends, he wishes to 
approach thee. Clothed with every excellent quality as the sun 
with its rays, he is about to depart for the forest, be pleased 
to receive him, O Sire.** 
The virtuous monarch, the knower of dharma, profound as 
the sea, pure as the sky, spoke : " O Sumantra, summon the 
ladies of the court, I wish to see Rama in their presence.** 
Entering the private apartments of the queens, Sumantra 
said : " His majesty demands your presence, go to him without 
delay.** Thus addressed by Sumantra, in obedience to the 
wishes of their consort, they prepared to approach the king. 
Three hundred and fifty women, their eyes reddened with 
weeping on account of Rama's departure, surrounding Queen 
Kaushalya, slowly advanced towards the king. They being 
present, the king commanded Sumantra to bring his son before 
him. 
Sumantra bringing Shri Rama, Lakshmana and Sita with him, 
speedily entered the apartment of the king. The monarch 
beholding Shri Rama approaching, rose from his seat, and ran 
towards him in haste, with his consorts, but ere he reached 
him fell senseless to the earth. 
235 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Then Shri Rama and Lakshmana advancing, lifted up the 
king who had been rendered unconscious by grief and suffering. 
The palace resounded with the lamentations of a thousand 
women crying, " Rama, Rama **, "Alas I Alas ! " the tinkling 
of their ornaments, drowned in the tumult of their cries. 
Shri Rama and Lakshmana supporting the king in their arms, 
conveyed him to the couch, and after a long time, he revived. 
Then Shri Ramachandra addressed the monarch who was 
sinking in the ocean of grief, and said : " O Great King, 
Master of All, I am about to enter the Dandaka forest, be 
gracious enough to look on me with favour. Grant also that 
Lakshmana and Sita accompany me, since they, setting aside 
my counsel that they should remain here, have with fixed 
purpose, resolved to follow me. O Sire, giving up grief, 
command us, as Prajapati commands his subjects." 
His eyes filled with compassion, fixing his gaze on his beloved 
son, the king, knowing him to be about to enter the forest 
with a serene heart, said : " O Ramachandra, I have been 
deceived by Queen Kaikeyi by reason of a promise, do thou, 
setting me aside, seize the kingdom of Ayodhya by force." 
Hearing the king's words, Rama, eminent in virtue, spoke 
eloquently and humbly : " My Lord, may God grant thee yet 
a thousand years to live and rule the earth! Desirous of 
following truth, I shall assuredly enter the forest, dwelling there 
fourteen years. I shall then return to serve thee and offer thee 
Held fast in the toils of truth, the king, urged on by Kaikeyi, 
wept and full of distress, answered : " O Child, to attain felicity 
in the other world and renown on earth and for the sake of 
thy return, enter the forest with a peaceful heart. May no fear 
from any source visit thee on the way. O Ramachandra, firm 
in truth and in the performance of duty, none can divert thee 
from the path of righteousness. O My Son, do not yet depart, 
stay one more night with thy mother and me. Satisfied after 
the night, early in the morning, do thou set out for the forest. 
My Child, for my sake, thou hast undertaken that which none 
can accomplish. For my good and my future happiness, thou 
hast chosen to enter the forest. O Child, in truth, I cannot 
suffer thy departure but am helpless. Deceived by Kaikeyi, 
236 
AYODHYA KANDA 
whose designs resemble a file covered with ashes, I am caught 
in this snare, but why must thou also suffer ? O Child, what 
wonder that thou, my eldest son, should desire thy father to 
uphold the truth." 
Hearing the words of his afflicted parent, Shri Rama, deeply 
distressed, answered : " O Father, if to-day I should remain 
happily in the royal palace, what of to-morrow ? Therefore, 
with thy permission, I would fain leave at once. Let thy 
kingdom, filled with wealth and grain, inhabited by thy subjects, 
surrounded by tributary states, be given to Prince Bharatal 
O Giver of Boons, my resolution to enter the forest is fixed. 
Thus hast thou ordained! I shall reside in the forest for 
fourteen years with the ascetics. Do thou, without delay, give 
the kingdom to Bharata ! I desire nought, nor is happiness 
as dear to me as obedience to thy commands. O My Father, 
do not grieve, nor be distressed ; the mighty ocean, Lord of the 
Rivers, does not overstep its bounds. O Sire, I desire neither 
kingdom nor pleasure, nor even Janaki,1 nor delight, nor heaven, 
nor life itself, but only wish to see thee the votary of truth. 
0 My Father, thou art as a god to me, I vow by the truth 
and the merits acquired by me that my words are free from 
the taint of hypocrisy. O My Father and Lord, I cannot remain 
here a moment longer ; restrain thy grief, nothing can move me 
from my resolve. When Kaikeyi commanded me to enter the 
forest, I answered " I will go ", therefore, true to my word, 
1 shall depart. Do not be distressed, O My Lord, I shall live 
in the forest where peaceful deer abound and birds sing their 
beautiful lays. O Father, a father is said to be the god of gods ; 
knowing thee to be a supreme deity, I am obedient to thy 
behests. O August King, I shall easily pass fourteen years in 
the forest and then return to thee. Now it becomes thee to 
pacify those afflicted and sorrowful. O Lion among men, fulfil 
thy duty and do not fall a victim to grief. I renounce the 
capital the kingdom and the earth ; let them be given to 
Bharata. Without hesitation I shall follow thy command and 
enter the forest. Let this kingdom adorned by high mountains 
and deep forests, filled with cities and villages, be ruled by 
Prince Bharata according to dharma. Let thy word be fulfilled. 
1 Janaki — a name of Sita. 
*37 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
0 King, my heart is not given to delights nor to any object 
of pleasure, all I desire is to carry out thy commands, approved 
by virtuous men. O King, give up all sorrow for my sake ; 
1 neither desire happiness nor wealth, nor the earth, nor Janaki, 
nay not even life. I desire the world to know thee as the votary 
of truth. O My Lord, be happy. I, entering the forest filled 
with many kinds of trees, viewing the mountains and rivers, 
shall dwell joyfully, living on fruits and roots." 
The king filled with anguish, embraced his son and fell 
senseless to the earth. The queens all began to lament, save 
Kaikeyi alone. Then the aged Sumantra also fell unconscious 
and the whole palace was filled with lamentation. 
CHAPTER 35 
Sumantra arraigns Queen Kaikeyi 
Coming to his senses, the minister Sumantra, overcome with 
anger, breathing heavily, grinding his teeth, wringing his hands, 
beating his head, his eyes growing red, his colour altered, 
showed every sign of distress. Perceiving the Queen Kaikeyi 
to have forfeited the king's regard, Sumantra pierced her heart 
with words as keen as arrows, causing her to tremble. 
Penetrating to the most vulnerable parts of her being, Sumantra 
exposed the hidden defects of the queen by his barbed words. 
He said : " O lady, thou hast abandoned thy husband the 
nourisher and supporter of the movable and immovable. 
There is nought undesirable in the world that thou hast not 
accomplished. I consider thee the murderess of thy husband 
and the destroyer of thy family. By thy vile deeds, thou hast 
smitten King Dasaratha, who is unconquerable, who resembles 
Indra and who is immovable as a mountain. O Kaikeyi, do not 
insult the aged king who has conferred these boons upon thee. 
Obedience to her husband should, in a woman, far exceed the 
love of a thousand sons. It is the ancient tradition of this 
dynasty, that the eldest son succeed his father, but thou seekest 
238 
AYODHYA KANDA 
to revoke it and make thy son ruler while the aged king still 
lives. Let thy son Bharata rule the kingdom, we will follow 
Kama wheresoever he goes. No one of good report will remain 
to help thy son in the administration, since thou seekest to 
repudiate the immemorial usage. I wonder the earth does not 
open and swallow thee for thy misdeeds. Why do the holy 
sages not condemn thee utterly ? What fool cuts at the root 
of a sweet mango tree with his axe in order to plant a nimba1 
tree in its place, which does not bear sweet fruit even if watered 
with milk. It is a common saying that honey does not flow 
from the nimba tree. I perceive thee to be as wicked as thy 
mother. The sins committed by thy mother are known to me, 
I have heard of them on trustworthy report. Thy father, by 
virtue of a boon granted to him by a Yogi, understood the 
language of all creatures ; of every bird, he understood the 
voice. Once, returning to the capital, he heard the converse 
between two ants and laughed, whereupon thy mother grew 
wrath and threatened to take her life, saying : ' I must know 
the cause of thy laughter.' The king replied, saying : 'OLady, 
if I tell thee the cause of my laughter, it will undoubtedly lead 
to my death.' Then thy mother spoke to her husband, Kaikeya 
saying : ' I care not if thou livest or diest, tell me the cause 
of thy laughter. If thou wen dead, thou couldst not insult 
me with thy laughter '." 
The king approaching the Yogi, told him the whole story, 
and the Yogi said : " O King, let thy wife return to the house 
of her father or die, do not thou reveal the secret to her." Then 
King Kaikeya with a contented mind abandoned thy mother, 
and lived free like Kuvera. O Sinful Queen, thou also followeth 
the evil path, deceiving the king and urging him to evil ways. 
It is a true saying * The son follows the father and the daughter 
the mother '. Do not follow thy mother, but obey thy husband, 
the king, our protector, by regarding his word. Cease to be 
ruled by evil and do not lead thy husband into the way of 
unrighteousness. The king will not rescind the promise made 
to thee. O Lady, entreat the king to bestow the crown on Rama 
who is the eldest son, who is generous, virtuous, a fulfiller of his 
duty, and a protector of all living beings. If Shri Rama goes 
1 Nimba Tree or Nima Tree, a tree with exceedingly bitter leaves. 
239 R 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
to the forest, the whole world will speak ill of thee. Let thy 
mind be at peace and let Rama be crowned. If any other than 
Rama rule the kingdom, it will not profit thee. If Rama 
becomes regent, then the king following the ancient tradition 
wjll doubtless retire to the forest" 
Thus did Sumantra with harsh words arraign the queen in 
the assembly, but Kaikeyi was in no wise moved, neither did 
she show any sign of repentance, nor did her countenance change. 
chapter 36 
She disregards the words of the chief minister and the king 
Then King Dasaratha, deeply distressed on account of his vow, 
addressed the weeping Sumantra, saying : " O Sumantra, 
prepare four divisions of the army laden with wealth to 
accompany Shri Rama. Let beautiful and eloquent women 
and merchants follow in his train, together with rich traders 
who can set up stores stocked with those things necessary for 
the army of Shri Rama. Let those personal attendants pleasing 
to Rama, having received abundant wealth, accompany him. Let 
chosen citizens accompany Rama with instruments of war and 
vehicles, and those who know the forest paths, go also. Shri 
Rama hunting the deer and elephants, drinking fresh honey 
and enjoying the beauty of the rivers will call those left behind 
to remembrance. Let all my wealth and grain be sent with 
Rama to the uninhabited forest. Observing sacrifices with the 
sages in sacred places, bestowing alms upon them, Shri Rama 
will dwell there happily. Prince Bharata will govern the people 
here and Rama set out abundantly provided." 
Kaikeyi was seized with fear on hearing the words of the king, 
her mouth dried up and she was unable to speak. Trembling 
with agitation, she then said : " O Chief of men, Bharata will 
not accept the kingdom stripped of its wealth and people, 
resembling unfermented wine." 
The eyes of the king reddened with anger at the cruel and 
240 
AYODHYA KANDA 
shameless words of Kaikeyi, and he replied : " O Wicked 
Wretch, why dost thou seek to crush me with this load of sorrow ? 
When thou didst demand Rama's exile, thou didst not add 
he should go empty handed ? " 
At the king's words, the fury of Kaikeyi was redoubled, 
and she said : " Of thy dynasty, King Sagara sent his son 
Asumanjas into exile. Let Rama depart in the same 
manner." 
At these words, King Dasaratha cried, " Woe, alas ! " and 
all the people felt ashamed, but Kaikeyi remained unmoved. 
Then the chief minister, Siddhartha by name, a virtuous 
man, much favoured by King Dasaratha, addressed Kaikeyi, 
saying : " O Lady, Asumanjas, seizing the children playing in 
the street, threw them into the river Sarayu, for this he was 
considered an exceedingly wicked man. The people of the city, 
disgusted with his cruel deeds, entreated King Sagara to banish 
him, saying : ' Wilt thou preserve us or Prince Asumanjas in 
the city ? ' King Sagara enquired of them the cause of their 
fear and they said in reply : * Prince Ansumanjas has become 
insane, catching our children while at play and throwing them 
into the river ; he rejoices in this act.' King Sagara, therefore, 
abandoned his malevolent son and placing him on a carriage 
with his wife, clothing and other necessities, proclaimed : 
'Asumanjas is banished for life.' Asumanjas, armed with an axe 
and basket, wandered about in the forest and reaped the fruit 
of his evil deeds. The righteous Maharajah Sagara banished 
his son on account of his evil conduct but, O Queen, what 
wrong has Rama done that he should be exiled by thee ? I see 
no fault in Rama. It were as easy to find a taint in the moon ! 
O Lady, if thou hast found any fault with Rama, then declare it 
openly and he will be banished from the kingdom. O Kaikeyi, 
it is an unrighteous act to abandon one following the path of 
virtue, without substantial reason ; such an act would destroy 
the splendour of Xndra himself. O Lady of Beautiful 
Countenance, do not destroy the prosperity of Shri Rama chandra and become a source of ignominy to the people." 
Hearing the words of the minister Siddhartha, King Dasaratha, 
overcome with grief, spoke to Kaikeyi, in broken accents and 
said : " O Sinful One, dost thou disregard the words of my 
241 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
minister ? Art thou blind to thine own welfare and mine ? 
Art thou determined to follow the evil path ? Giving up my 
wealth and substance and the comforts of the palace, I will 
follow Rama. Do thou rule at ease with Bharata for ever." 
CHAPTER 37 
Despite the instruction of Vasishtha, Shri Sita still desires 
to enter the forest 
Hearing the words of the chief minister Siddhartha and those 
of the king, the gentle prince humbly made the following reply : 
" O King, having renounced all pleasures to live on the products 
of the forest, what need have I for wealth, an army or other 
requisites ? Who will concern himself with the ropes binding 
the howdah to the elephant when he has parted with the 
elephant? O Great One, such am I, what occasion have I 
for an army in the forest ? Let it be given to Prince Bharata, 
Bring me garments of bark. I go to pass fourteen years in 
the forest, and need but a spade to dig for roots and fruit 
and a creel and basket. I wish to start without further delay." 
Hearing his words, Kaikeyi rose up and brought the robes 
of bark, and in the midst of the assembly without shame, 
addressed Prince Rama saying : " Put them on." 
Shri Ramachandra receiving the raiment from Kaikeyi, 
discarding his rich apparel, put on the dress of bark. Shri 
Lakshmana also putting off his beautiful robes, put on the dress 
of an ascetic in the presence of his father. Shri Sita dressed in 
a lovely silken sari, seeing the robes of bark proffered her, 
was startled, like a doe at the sight of the fowler's snare. 
The Princess Janaki, endowed with excellent qualities, 
received the bark dress, in shame and distress. Versed in the 
duties of a faithful spouse, she, addressing her god-like husband, 
her eyes suffused with tears, said : " How do the ascetics put 
on the robes of bark ? " 
Shri Sita, ignorant of the custom, remained confused. 
242 
AYODHYA KANDA 
Unskilled in the art of wearing robes of bark, putting one end 
of the vestment round her neck and holding the other in her 
hands, she stood perplexed. Then Ramachandra, chief of the 
good, approaching the princess, fastened the robe of bark over 
her silken sari. All the ladies of the court, perceiving Rama 
assisting Sita in putting on the dress of bark, began to weep 
and timidly addressed the illustrious Rama : " O Beloved Prince, 
thy father has not granted Shri Sita permission to enter the 
forest. Do thou enter the forest in accordance with the king's 
behest, but let not Janaki go with thee, Let our life be fruitful 
beholding her face. Let Lakshmana go with thee for thy 
protection, but the beautiful Sita is not fitted to dwell in the 
forest like an ascetic. O Rama, prompted by dharma, go 
without delay as thou desirest but, we entreat thee, leave 
Princess Sita with us." 
Shri Rama, knowing that Sita was not willing to stay there 
in his absence, disregarding the request, helped Sita to don 
the bark raiment. Shri Vasishtha, the king's preceptor, seeing 
Sita attired in the habit of an ascetic, was displeased, and said 
to Kaikeyi : " O Destroyer of thy Dynasty, O Evil-minded 
Kaikeyi, thou hast deceived the king and now exceed the boons 
granted to thee, thou art dead to all good sense. It is not 
for Princess Sita to enter the forest, let her rule in the place 
of Rama till he return. The wife is, as it were, half of her 
spouse, therefore, what is his due is hers also. Shri Sita being 
the half of Shri Rama is in his absence entitled to the throne. 
Should Shri Sita accompany Rama, then I and all the people 
of Ayodhya will follow him. Where Rama goes with Sita, 
there will follow the guards, the people of the kingdom and 
the citizens of the capital. Yea, even Prince Bharata and 
Prince Shatraghuna, assuming the robes of ascetics will accom pany their elder brother. Then this kingdom abandoned by 
men, peopled by trees alone, will be governed by thee, O Thou, 
bent on the destruction of thy subjects. Know well, that is 
no kingdom where Shri Rama is not king, but the forest in 
which Rama dwells becomes the kingdom. The king unwillingly 
consenting, may bestow the kingdom on Bharata, but Bharata 
will never accept the crown, nor will he honour thee as his 
mother, if he be the true son of King Dasaratha. Even if thou 
243 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
sliouldst die, yet will Prince Bharata, acquainted with the 
ancient law, refuse to rule the kingdom as long as his elder 
brother, Shri Ramachandra lives. Thou, desiring the advance ment of thy son, Bharata, seeking to make him king, art in 
reality bringing him to grief, since all will follow Shri 
Ramachandra. O Kaikeyi, thou shalt see beasts, snakes, deer, 
birds and even trees, bend before Rama, swayed by his love, 
not to speak of men. O Lady, remove the dress of bark and 
let Sita be attired in royal robes, the ascetic's garb ill befits her." 
The Guru Vasishtha forbade Sita to don the robe of bark 
and said to the queen : " O Daughter of the King Kaikeya, 
thou hast demanded the exile of Rama alone, let Sita be clad 
in royal robes when accompanying Rama. The boon exacted 
by thee did not imply the exile of Shri Sita, therefore, let the 
princess, beautifully arrayed and adorned, enter the forest in 
a royal chariot." 
Despite the instruction of the resplendent sage, chief among 
the brahmins and the king's preceptor, Shri Sita, not relinquish ing the ascetic's dress, desired to enter the forest, attired like 
her lord. 
CHAPTER 38 
Shri Rama requests the king to protect his mother during his 
absence 
Seeing Sita, like a widow though possessing a husband, putting 
on the habit of bark, all the people present condemned King 
Dasaratha. The king hearing their murmuring lost all interest 
in life, virtue and fame, formerly cherished by him. Sighing 
deeply, he said to his consort Kaikeyi : — 
" O Kaikeyi, it is unfitting for Sita to enter the forest wearing 
the habit of an ascetic. Our holy Guru Vasishtha has spoken 
truly. Sita is not fitted for life in the forest, that frail princess 
is worthy of perpetual happiness. Has the daughter of the great 
Emperor Janaka caused injury to any, that amidst the people 
244 
AYODHYA KANDA 
she stands mute, dressed in a robe of bark, like an ascetic ? 
I gave no promise that the daughter of King Janaka should put 
on the dress of a devotee. Let this princess enter the forest attired 
in an auspicious manner, with all her ornaments. My death is 
not far distant and my mind is in confusion ; by promising 
these boons to thee, I have been brought to nought. This act is 
consuming me as is the bamboo by its flowering.1 If it be said 
that Shri Rama has done thee injury, O Sinful One, what barm 
did Janaki ever do to thee ? Of what dost thou accuse the 
daughter of King Janaka, whose eyes resemble the gazelle's 
and who is meek and gentle. 
" O Wicked One, by sending Rama without reason to the 
forest, thou shall assuredly enter hell ; what else will not befall 
thee on account of thy evil deeds ? 
" When Shri Rama approached me on the eve of his installa tion, then didst thou forbid him to inaugurate the ceremony 
and charged him to enter the forest with matted locks in an 
ascetic's garb. By my silence, I gave consent, but now, desirous 
of plunging thyself into hell thou requirest Sita to enter the 
forest robed in the habit of a recluse." 
King Dasaratha, lamenting, saw no end to his distress. At 
length, helpless and overcome with grief, on account of his son, 
he fell to the ground. 
Shri Rama, his head bowed, ready to enter the forest, 
observing his father's distress, said: "O King, my mother 
Kaushalya, devoted to her lord, aged and of a generous 
disposition, who never speaks ill of any, bereft of me will be 
drowned in a sea of sorrow. She who has hitherto known no 
suffering is now worthy of thy special regard. O Father, thou 
to whom honour is due, regard my mother with affectionate 
attention, that she may not suffer in the separation from her son 
and the bearing of many woes, but live dependent on thee. 
O Emperor, equal to Indra in power, protect my mother in 
my absence that she may not languish and die." 
1 When a bamboo flowers, the whole clump ii laid to perish. 
245 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 39 
As they prepare far departure the palace resounds with grief 
Hearing the words of Rama and beholding him in the guise 
of an ascetic, the king lost consciousness and his consorts turned 
away in distress. Overcome with grief, the wretched monarch 
could neither look on Rama nor utter a word to him and for 
a space remained insensible. Then, regaining consciousness, 
the long-armed king, remembering Rama, began to lament : 
" Now, without doubt, I know that in some previous birth, 
I separated many calves from their mothers and deprived many 
beings of their lives, on account of which all this has befallen 
me. The vital airs do not leave the body before the appointed 
time ; though tormented by Kaikeyi, yet death does not claim 
me. Alas ! I behold Shri Ramachandra, resplendent as fire, 
divested of his royal robes and attired in ascetic's garb. This 
evil caused by Kaikeyi, through guile and the desire for personal 
advantage is the source of universal distress." 
The king's eyes were suffused with tears and crying : " Rama, 
Rama," his throat choked, and he could utter no more. After 
some time, still shedding tears, he addressed Sumantra, saying : 
" Yoke the best steeds to the chariot and convey Shri Rama 
out of the city. Now it is made clear that a man's virtue leads 
him into affliction, since so wise and valiant a son is being 
banished by his parents." 
As instructed by the king, Sumantra yoked the most excellent 
of steeds to a richly decorated chariot and bringing the golden 
car with the best steeds yoked thereto, before the prince, 
said humbly : " The chariot is at hand." 
The king then summoned his upright and trustworthy 
treasurer and spoke to him in words suitable to the place and 
time : " Bring hither for Janaki, costly apparel and ornaments 
to serve the princess for fourteen years." As instructed by 
the king, the master of the treasury brought the various articles 
and delivered them to Princess Sita. The highly born Sita, 
attiring herself in a sumptuous robe and ornaments, made ready 
to depart for die forest. Thus attired, Shri Janaki illumined 
the palace as the rays of the rising sun illumine the sky. 
246 
AYODHYA KANDA 
Queen Kaushalya embraced the princess of virtuous conduct 
to her bosom and blessing her said : " The world is filled with 
undutiful wives, who cease to regard their lord when he has 
fallen into distress. Such is the nature of those who having 
enjoyed great pleasures, on finding their consort involved in 
trouble, condemn and sometimes even abandon him. Many are 
the women, untruthful, heartless, unchaste, devious1 and vain, 
full of evil passions, the destroyers of long-honoured ties. 
Neither a worthy family nor duty, nor the instruction of the 
Guru, nor gifts, sway them, nor do they honour the marriage 
ties, their minds being fickle. But those women devoted to 
their husbands, of virtuous conduct, honouring the tradition 
of their family, truthful, following the instructions of then preceptor, regard their lord as the chief of men. Therefore, 
do not condemn my son, now ready to enter the forest, who 
should be regarded by thee rather as a deity, whether in poverty 
or prosperity.** 
Shri Sita, understanding the import of these words, inspired 
by dhanna, humbly replied : O Noble Lady, I will fulfil thy 
commands. It is known to me that a woman should serve 
her lord, and my parents have instructed me in the matter. 
Do not deem me a false woman. I am as unable to forsake 
the path of virtue as the sun's light the moon. As a lute is 
useless without strings, as a chariot cannot move without wheels, 
so is a wife bereft of her husband, even if she have a hundred 
sons. 
" Father, mother or son can give but a small measure of 
happiness, but a husband is the source of limitless joy. What 
woman is so unworthy that she will not obey her husband ? 
I am acquainted with all the duties of a wife, being instructed by 
those eminent in virtue. A husband is as a god to his consort, 
never shall I not honour him." 
The simple-hearted queen, shedding tears of distress on 
account of the separation from her son, hearing Princess Sita's 
words, was comforted. 
Then Rama said : " O Mother, when I am in the forest, 
do not look on my father with a reproachful countenance, the 
term of my exile will soon be ended. The fourteen years will 
1 Whose minds are not easily known. 
247 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
pass like a dream. Surrounded by my friends, thou shalt behold 
me soring my sire." 
Speaking thus to his mother Kaushalya, Shri Rama reflected 
how to address the three hundred and fifty other consorts of 
the king. To these who were bitterly lamenting, he spoke with 
humility. "While living amongst you, if I have ever, in 
ignorance, offended you, be gracious enough to pardon me." 
These pious and humble words of Rama, inspired by dharma, 
touched the hearts of the queens, causing them to shed tears 
and their lamentations resembled the sound of krouncha birds. 
The palace of the king, formerly resounding to the beating 
of drums resembling the crash of thunder, was to-day filled 
with the wailing of the sorrow-stricken queens. 
CHAPTER 40 
All Ayodhya is distressed to see Shri Rama's chariot depart 
Shri Rama overcome with grief, touched the feet of his sovereign 
and bowing down, with Lakshmana and Sita, circumambulated 
the king. Having taken leave of his sire, Rama with Sita paid 
reverence to the sorrow-stricken Queen Kaushalya. 
Then Shri Lakshmana bowed before the Queen Kaushalya 
and embraced the feet of his mother Sumitra. His mother 
weeping, desiring her son's good, blessed Lakshmana and said : 
" O My Son, Shri Rama was born of Queen Kaushalya for the 
protection of the world, and I have borne thee so that, devoted 
to Shri Rama, thou shouldst accompany him to the forest. O 
My Son, do not neglect the service of Shri Rama. O Sinless 
One, whether in fortune or in adversity, regard him as thy life I 
It is the duty of the good to be subject to their elders. The 
tradition of thy dynasty is the giving of charity, the performance 
of sacrifice, death on the field of battle and implicit regard for 
thine elders." 
Speaking thus, Sumitra seeing Rama ready to depart for the 
forest, again and again exhorted Lakshmana in this wise : " O 
248 
AYODHYA KANDA 
My Son, enter the forest with Rama. O Child, have no anxiety, 
do not grieve either for thy father, mother, home or country, 
esteem Rama to be Dasaratha, Janaki as myself and the forest 
equal to Ayodhya." 
Sumantra now addressed Rama with humility as Matali1 
addresses Indra : " O Illustrious Prince, be pleased to mount 
the chariot, I will take thee wheresoever thou desirest. Let 
the period of thine exile enjoined by Kaikeyi begin to-day." 
Then the beautiful daughter of King Janaka, adorned with 
the jewels, bestowed on her by the king, cheerfully mounted 
the waiting vehicle, which shone like the sun. Shri Rama and 
Lakshmana also swiftly ascended the chariot enriched with gold 
and weapons. 
Having regard to the period of exile, King Dasaratha had 
bestowed on his daughter-in-law, robes and jewels and ordered 
arms and mantra-charged weapons, armour and shields to be 
placed on the chariot. Seeing that all were mounted, Sumantra 
set the chariot in motion guiding the horses swift as the wind. 
Rama having started for the Dandaka forest, the whole city, 
young and old, men and women, soldiers, elephants and horses, 
distracted and full of indignation and distress, became as beings 
demented. The loosing of elephants, and the loud neighing of 
horses filled Ayodhya with tumult and ferment. Young and 
old, distraught, ran after the chariot of Rama as men overpowered 
by the sun plunge into water. Some running beside the royal 
car, some behind looking up towards Rama, others weeping 
and lamenting, cried to Sumantra : " O Charioteer, drive slowly, 
draw in thy steeds, so that we may see the face of Rama so soon 
to be hidden from us. Surely the heart of his mother must be 
made of steel that it did not break on seeing the godlike prince 
departing for the forest. Great indeed is Shri Sita, who follows 
her husband like a shadow, as the light of the sun that never 
forsakes the Meru mountain. O Lakshmana, perfect art thou, 
constantly serving thine amiable and godlike brother. This is 
perfection, this is prosperity, thus to attend thy brother is the 
way to heaven." 
Thus lamenting, following the chariot of Rama, the people 
could not restrain their tears. The afflicted and wretched 
1 Matali — Indra's charioteer. 
H9 
THE R<AMAYANA OF VALMJIKI 
monarch, King Dasaratha, overcome with grief, coming forth 
from the palace barefooted, surrounded by his queens, cried 
out : " I must again behold my beloved son." Then he heard 
the lament of the women wailing like she elephants when their 
mates axe bound in chains, and like the full moon in eclipse, 
King Dasaratha was bereft of bis splendour. 
Shri Rama, free from anxiety, urged the charioteer on, saying : 
" Faster ! faster ! " and as he spoke, enjoining Sumantra to 
drive more speedily, the people cried, *' Stay, stay ", so that 
the charioteer knew not how to obey both commands. The dust 
raised by the wheels of Rama's chariot was laid by the tears 
of the people. As Shri Rama left the city, the people weeping 
and bewildered were distraught, the tears of the women falling 
like drops of water on lotus leaves, when fishes leap. The 
people following Rama's chariot and perceiving the anguish 
of the king, wept in sympathy. A great tumult now arose 
from the ladies of the palace and the king's attendants all 
weeping and crying, " O Rama ! O Kaushalya ! " and hearing 
the wailing and lamentation of the people Shri Rama looked 
back and beheld the king and his mother Kaushalya, bare footed, following his chariot, and was filled with sorrow. 
Shri Rama, bound by the cord of duty, turned his eyes from 
his parents, as a foal not permitted to follow its dam. Perceiving 
his royal parents, unacquainted with suffering, worthy of 
excellent chariots, running barefooted towards him, he said to 
Sumantra : " Drive on speedily ! " unable to bear the sight 
of his parents' distress, as an elephant is unable to bear the goad. 
His mother Kaushalya trembling and tottering, ran towards him, 
like a cow hearing the cries of her calf that has been bound, 
crying, " O Rama ! O Sita ! O Lakshmana ! " The king 
calling, M Stay ! Stay ! " to the charioteer, with Rama crying, 
" Go forward speedily ", caused the heart of Sumantra to be 
riven, like one standing between two rival armies. 
On this, Rama addressed him, saying : " On thy return to the 
palace, when charged by the king with disobeying his commands, 
do thou say : 'Amidst the noise of the rolling wheels, I was 
unable to hear.' Further delay will prove calamitous." Shri 
Sumantra regarding the words of the prince, signalling the 
people following to return, urged the horses on. 
250 
AYODHYA KANDA 
The chariot outstripping the king, caused him to halt with 
his household and mentally circumambulating Rama, he returned 
to the palace. The courtiers now said to the king : *' None 
follows a friend far, whom he wishes to see return." King 
Dasaratha hearing this injunction, bathed in perspiration, utterly 
wretched, stood gazing at the receding chariot. 
CHAPTER 41 
The whole world grieves for Prince Rama 
THAT Lion among men, Prince Ramachandra, having in humility 
departed, a great cry of distress arose among the ladies of the 
inner apartment. They cried : " Where is Ramachandra, the 
only asylum and refuge of the orphaned, the weak and the 
suffering ? Where is Prince Rama, who when provoked, showed 
no anger, who caused no agitation to any heart, who appeased 
those who were wrathful, and considered others' distress as his 
own ? Where is that Rama now, who treated us with the same 
regard as he showed his illustrious mother, Queen Kaushalya ? 
Where is he wandering now, that Rama, Protector of the World, 
who has gone to the forest, persecuted by Kaikeyi, and exiled 
by his father ? O, how insensible the king has grown, that he 
has sent the virtuous and truthful Rama, the object of universal 
love, into exile." In this way, all the ladies of the court wept 
aloud like cows who have been bereft of their calves. The king 
overwhelmed with grief on account of separation from his son, 
suffered increasingly on hearing the loud and piteous cries of 
the ladies of the palace. On the prince's departure, no brahma chari performed the fire ceremony, no householder prepared food 
but passed the day in deep distress. The elephants cast off 
their trappings and the cows refused to nourish their calves, 
mothers showed no delight at the sight of their first-born. 
Trishanku, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn and Venus and other in auspicious planets gathered round the moon, pulsating there ; 
the stars lost their brilliance and the planets their splendour. 
251 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Vishaka,1 growing dim, was scarcely distinguishable in the sky. 
The clouds, driven by a strong wind, overtaking each other, 
resembled waves rising in the sea. When Shri Rama departed, 
an earthquake caused the city to tremble, the ten cardinal points 
were covered in darkness, neither were the planets nor the stars 
visible. All the inhabitants of the city were overwhelmed with 
misery, none partook of food that day or found pleasure in any 
pastime. All the people of Ayodhya, sighing heavily, were filled 
with sorrow and grieved for the king. Those walking in the 
streets wept and nowhere was there any sign of joy. No 
cool breezes blew, nor did the moon shine, the rays of the sun 
were weak and the whole world mourned for Rama. Sons 
gave no thought to their parents, husbands were indifferent to 
their wives and brothers showed no affection to each other ; 
all were sunk in grief. The friends of Rama, unconscious of 
themselves and filled with distress, were bereft of sleep. Without 
Rama, Ayodhya resembled the earth with all its mountains, 
suffering from drought. Every household was consumed with 
grief and the cries of elephants, horses and warriors filled the city. 
chapter 42 
Without Rama the king's heart finds no rest 
So long as the dust raised by the wheels of Rama's chariot could 
be seen, so long did the king not withdraw his gaze from the 
way. So long as King Dasaratha could see his beloved and 
most virtuous son, Shri Ramachandra, so long did he stand 
gazing after him, and when the dust was no more visible, 
the wretched monarch, stricken with grief fell to the earth. 
Then Queen Kaushalya taking hold of his right hand and 
Queen Kaikeyi his left, ministered to him. The virtuous and 
upright king beholding Queen Kaikeyi near him, said : " O 
Wicked Queen, touch me not, I do not desire to see thy 
countenance. Thou art neither my consort, nor do I desire 
1 Vishaka — a lunar aitritm, appearing in October. 
252 
AYODHYA KANDA 
relationship with thee ; thy servants are no longer my servants, 
nor am I their master. Thou, who hast abandoned obedience 
to thy lord, I now repudiate. Thy hand, accepted by me 
when circumambulating the sacred fire, I relinquish, and 
renounce the worldly and spiritual pledges given thee in the 
ceremony. If Bharata, receiving this kingdom, is satisfied, 
then let him not perform my obsequies." 
Queen Kaushalya, torn with grief, raised the king, soiled with 
dust, and conveyed him to bis chariot. The king sorely afflicted, 
remembering his son in ascetic's garb, resembled one who has 
murdered a brahmin or touches a blazing fire with his naked 
hand. Turning again and again towards the path that the 
chariot had taken, the king's countenance resembled the sun 
in eclipse. Conceiving his son Rama to have passed beyond 
the city boundary, and thinking of him, he again gave way 
to grief, crying : " I see the marks of the hoofs of the horses 
that were yoked to the chariot of my son, but him I do not see. 
Alas ! My Son, who perfumed with sandalpaste, slept on soft 
pillows, fanned by beautiful women, to-day sleeps beneath a tree 
with wood or stone for his pillow. In the morning, he will awake 
on the hard ground, his mind oppressed, his body smeared 
with dust, sighing deeply like a bull rising from beside a spring. 
The dwellers in the forest will behold Rama rising like an orphan 
and wandering as one forlorn. That daughter of King Janaka 
worthy of every happiness, her feet pierced with thorns, hearing 
the roar of animals like tigers, will be struck with terror ; O 
Kaikeyi, thy ambition is fulfilled, now rule the kingdom as a 
widow for I cannot support life without the chief of men." 
Thus lamenting, the king returned to the capital, like a man 
having cremated one supremely dear to him. He beheld courts 
and houses deserted, the markets forsaken and the temples closed, 
while on the royal highway only the feeble and afflicted 
were to be seen. Seeing the city desolate and remembering 
Shri Rama, weeping bitterly, the king entered the palace as the 
sun enters a cloud. As the presence of an eagle deprives a lake 
of its serpents, rendering it still, so did the capital appear when 
Shri Rama, Lakshmana and Sita had gone into exile. 
Then the king in distress, his throat choked with grief, spoke 
in faint and trembling accents : " Take me speedily to the palace 
253 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIK1 
of Queen Kaushalya, the mother of Rama, nowhere else can I 
obtain peace." 
The attendants carried the king to the apartments of Queen 
Kaushalya and placed him on a couch, but the king's heart 
could find no rest ; the palace without Rama, Lakshmana and 
Ska appeared to him like the sky bereft of the moon. Finding 
no delight there, the king lifting up bis hands, cried : " O 
My Son, O Rama, art thou leaving me ? How blessed are they 
who seeing Rama return, will embrace him." 
Finding the night dark, resembling the hour of death, the king 
at midnight thus addressed Kaushalya : " O Kaushalya, I do 
not see thee, my sight has followed Rama, nor has it yet returned, 
therefore, reach forth thy hand and touch me, O Queen." 
Seeing her royal consort merged in the remembrance of Rama, 
the queen, sighing, seated herself by the king and began to 
lament in sympathy with him. 
chapter 43 
The lament of Queen Kaushalya 
Queen Kaushalya, deeply afflicted by the separation from her 
son, seeing the king lying on the couch merged in grief, said : 
" O King, that evil Kaikeyi having discharged her poison on 
Shri Rama, will wander about at will, like a snake that has cast 
its slough. That sinful woman, having accomplished her design 
and sent Rama to the forest will ever inspire me with terror, 
like a venomous serpent in the home. If her demand had been 
that Rama should dwell in the city on alms or had she condemned 
him to be her slave, it were better than exile. She has cast out 
Rama, as the oblation offered to the asuras is cast away by those 
who tend the sacrificial fire. The long armed Rama, the wielder 
of the great bow, walking like the king of elephants, must by now 
have reached the forest with Sita and Lakshmana. O King, 
consider how thy son Rama, who has never before experienced 
suffering, is banished by thee, urged by Kaikeyi 1 O What fate 
254 
AYODHYA KANDA 
will befall them now? Without wealth, exiled in his youth 
when a king's happiness should have been his portion, how will 
he be able to live on roots and berries in the forest ? Will the 
time ever come when I shall see Rama, Lakshmana and Sita 
return, putting an end to my sorrow ? When will that glad day 
dawn, when the illustrious capital rilled with rejoicing crowds, 
decorated with flags, banners and garlands, welcomes Rama ? 
0 will that auspicious hour ever strike, when the citizens hearing 
of his return will be filled with gladness, like the sea at the time 
of the full moon ? When will Shri Rama with Sita, enter the 
city, like the bull who, at dusk, preceding the herd of cows, 
returns to the town. When will the people of the capital, 
waiting to scatter rice over him, gather in thousands on the 
highways to welcome Rama, the subduer of his foes ? O, 
when shall I see my sons, resplendent as two mountain peaks, 
return to Ayodhya, adorned with earrings, bearing the sword 
and scimitar. When will the two princes, circumambulating 
the city with Janata, receive gifts of flowers and fruit from the 
hands of virgins and brahmins ? When will the virtuous and 
sagacious Rama run towards me, leaping like a child ? Surely 
my love pours forth for him, as the breasts of mothers when 
suckling their infants. O Great King, because of this, Kaikeyi 
has increased my love for my child ; bereft of him, I am like 
a cow whose calf has been forcibly carried away by a lion. 
My only son Rama is versed in all the classics and endowed 
with every excellent quality ; without such a son, I cannot live. 
O Great King, I cannot sustain life in the absence of my brave 
and beloved son ; the fire of grief caused by the separation 
from my son is consuming me, as the rays of the sun in summer 
consume the surface of the earth." 
255 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 44 
She finds peace in the consolation of Queen Sumtra 
The righteous Queen Sumitra hearing the lament of Queen 
Kaushalya addressed her in reasonable words : " O Queen, 
why dost thou weep in abject fashion, for thy son, the chief 
of men, endowed with every virtue ? O Noble Lady, Shri Rama 
has renounced the throne and entered the forest to render his 
father illustrious, as the votary of truth. Shri Rama, honouring 
his father, has conducted himself as the best of men and secured 
the future glory of his sire. There is no cause for grief, since 
Rama is treading the path of dharma, neither is there cause 
to grieve for Lakshmana, ever compassionate to all, sinless, 
serving Rama and in every way worthy of the highest good. 
The tender-limbed Janaki, too, is following thy virtuous son. 
O Queen, the exile of Rama is no cause for sorrow since he is 
the protector of all beings and the follower of virtue. O Queen, 
the banner of bis good name waves over the three worlds. 
Consider the purity of Rama ; even the sun dares not cause him 
suffering by its rays. In his presence, the hot winds of the forest 
in summer will grow cool and like the spring breeze bring him 
refreshment ! When asleep in the forest at night, the moon, 
like a father, will succour him with its cool beams. That 
Ramachandra, to whom the Brahmarishi Vishwamitra gave 
celestial weapons on the death of his son Shambara, that valorous 
son, that lion among men, depending on the strength of his arms 
will dwell in the forest as fearlessly as in his own palace. That 
hero whose arrows destroy his foes, is certain to be succoured 
by the earth. That Rama, endowed with great prowess, power 
and courage, will soon return on the termination of his exile, 
to claim the kingdom. O Lady, Shri Rama, who illumines 
the sun which gives light to the whole world, who gives 
splendour to the fire, who is the supreme ruler of rulers, who is 
the tame of fame and the essence of forgiveness, who is the chief 
of beings j wherever he dwells, in the forest or the city, all is one 
to him. Shri Rama, this great hero, will speedily regain his 
kingdom, together with Sita, the earth and every prosperity. 
256 
AYODHYA KANDA 
Shri Rama for whom, when departing for the forest, the people 
of Ayodhya filled with grief, shed tears, will soon regain the 
kingdom. Nought is difficult to obtain in the world by him, 
who, though invincible, entered the forest, dressed like an ascetic, 
followed by Sita, who is Lakshmi1 in another form. 
" What should be difficult for him, who, armed with bow 
and sword, is preceded on his way by Lakshmana ? O Lady, 
abandon grief and infatuation, assuredly thou wilt behold Shri 
Rama returning from his exile. O Thou who art irreproachable, 
O Kalyani, O Auspicious One, thou wilt behold thy son like 
the rising moon, placing his head at thy feet. Thou wilt shed 
tears of joy, seeing thy son installed on the throne and in 
possession of the king's treasury. O Lady, neither grieve nor 
let thy mind be troubled, I see nought that is inauspicious in 
respect of Rama. Soon thou shalt behold thy son with Sita 
and Lakshmana. O Sinless Queen, it becomes thee to encourage 
others, therefore, why dost thou now cause thy heart distress ? 
O Devi, do not grieve, there is none in the world more virtuous 
than Rama. Seeing Rama returning from the forest with his 
friends, making obeisance to thee, then wilt thou shed tears 
of joy, like the clouds in the rainy season. In brief, I tell thee, 
thy son Shri Rama, returning to the capital, will press thy feet 
to him with his tender bands. Seeing thy son bowing to thy 
feet thou wilt cover him with tears as the clouds cover the 
mountains with rain." 
Thus did the beautiful Sumitra, ever persuasive and benevo lent to all, offer words of consolation to the Queen Kaushalya 
and having spoken, became silent. The chief queen, the mother 
of Shri Rama, hearing the words of Queen Sumitra, found peace 
and forgot her grief which resembled the rain of the autumn 
clouds that swiftly disappears. 
1 Labium— The Contort of Shri Vishnu. 
257 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
chapter 45 
The lament of the brahmins who follow Shri Rama 
The people of the capital, deeply devoted to Shri Rama, the 
Upholder of Truth, followed him on his way to the forest. 
Though King Dasaratha, on the advice of his ministers, turned 
back, the citizens of Ayodhya continued to run beside the chariot 
of Rama. The inhabitants of the city were devoted to Rama 
whose virtues rendered him resplendent like the full moon, and 
weeping piteously, implored the holy prince to return, but Rama, 
determined to prove his father to be true to his word, pressed on 
towards the forest. They, looking on Rama as a thirsty man 
looks on water, were addressed by him with tender affection 
as a father addresses his children. 
He said : " O Ye People of Ayodhya, for my sake bestow 
the love and honour shown to me, in even greater measure, 
on Bharata ! Prince Bharata, who is of an excellent disposition, 
will assuredly deal benevolently with you and endear himself 
to you. Though young, he is wise, gentle and endowed with 
great courage. Warm-hearted and charitable, you will have no 
cause for fear on his accession to the throne. King Dasaratha 
has appointed him heir-apparent in consideration of his great 
virtue, we should therefore obey the king. When I am absent 
in the forest, you should so act towards him as to occasion him 
no distress. Do you, desirous of pleasing me, obey the 
king." 
Rama, instructing the people to obey the king again and again 
only increased their desire to see him as their sovereign. It 
appeared that Rama with Lakshmana drew the distressed and 
weeping inhabitants of the city after them as if bound by a 
cord. 
Among the elders in age, wisdom and austerity, the first, 
their heads trembling with advanced years, calling from a 
distance, said : "O Ye Swift and Excellent Steeds, return, 
return, do not proceed further and favour Rama. All beings 
are endowed with perception, but you excel in the sense of 
hearing, therefore hear our entreaty and turn back. We know 
258 
AYODHYA KANDA 
the heart of our master to be simple and gentle, we know him 
to be a hero firm in his vows, therefore, return to Ayodhya, 
do not carry Rama away from the city to the forest." 
Hearing the lament of the aged brahmins and perceiving their 
distress, Shri Rama, causing the chariot to halt, dismounted. 
With Lakshmana and Sita, he walked towards the forest, 
followed by the multitude, proceeding slowly on foot. The ever 
virtuous and compassionate Rama was unable to endure the 
sight of the aged brahmins walking on foot, far behind the 
chariot. 
The brahmins seeing Rama did not return, despite their 
supplications, but still proceeded towards the forest, were 
troubled and overcome with distress, cried : " O Rama, thou 
art a friend of the brahmins and the whole caste is following 
thee with the sacred fire borne on their shoulders. See, we are 
carrying the holy canopies, like autumn clouds, obtained by us 
by observing the Vaja-peya1 ceremony. By covering thee with 
their shade, we will protect thee from the rays of the sun. O 
Child, formerly thy mind was set on the study of the Veda, 
but now thou art determined to enter the forest. Our only 
wealth, the Veda, we have stored in our memory and our 
consorts are at home, protected by their conjugal devotion. 
There is no cause for further reflection, we are determined to go 
with thee ! If thou dost not walk in the path of dharma, 
who will follow it ?* 
" O Rama, what more can be said ? We, whose heads are 
white like swan's down, offer humble salutations to thee. 
Among us, some have entered upon their sacrifices, O Rama, 
their completion depends on thee. Not we alone, but beasts, 
birds and trees, entreat thee to return ; have pity on all these. 
Trees desiring to follow thee, prevented by their roots which 
penetrate deep into the earth, implore thee not to depart, their 
branches bending low in the wind. See the birds, forgetting 
to seek their food, sit motionless on the trees, supplicating thee 
who art compassionate to all." 
Thus lamenting, the brahmins beheld the river Taxnasa as if 
obstructing the path of Rama, preventing his further progress. 
1 Vaja-peya. — A sacrifice at which a drink of this name is prepared for the god*. 
■ That u, show implicit obedience to the brahmins. 
>59 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Then Sumantra, loosing the tired horses, let them roll on 
the ground to relieve their fatigue and gave them to drink 
causing them to bathe in the river, and allowing them to graze 
on the banks of the Tamasa. 
chapter 46 
Shri Rama, with Sita and Lakskmana and the charioteer 
drive on alone to the forest 
Shri Rama, reaching the beautiful banks of the river Tamasa, 
gazing on Sita, addressed his brother Lakshmana : " O Son 
of Queen Sumitra, this is the first night of our exile, there is 
no cause for anxiety. The forest looks deserted and melancholy, 
the birds and beasts having retired to rest. Doubtless the 
capital of Ayodhya with its inhabitants and my royal sire are 
deeply distressed on account of our departure. The king, seeing 
in us many virtues, looks on us with deep affection. O 
Lakshmana, I fear lest my father and my illustrious mother 
become blind with incessant weeping. Yet Prince Bharata of 
upright conduct, will assuredly oner consolation to my parents 
in dutiful and pious words. O Mighty-armed Prince, reflecting 
on the compassion of Prince Bharata, I have no fear for my 
parents. O Hero, thou hast done well in accompanying me 
to the forest, had it not been so, my solicitude for Sita would 
have been great. O Lakshmana, there is an abundance of roots, 
fruits and berries here, but to-night I desire to partake of water 
alone." 
Having thus addressed Prince Lakshmana, Shri Rama said 
to Sumantra : " O Gentle Friend, attend to the horses with 
great care." The sun having set below the horizon, Sumantra, 
fastening the horses to a tree, placed tender grass before them, 
heedful of their welfare. The time of Sandhya1 having come, 
the charioteer observed his devotions according to the rules of 
his caste, then, with the help of Lakshmana, prepared a bed 
1 Sandhya — Evening devotion*. 
260 
AYODHYA KANDA 
for Rama. Perceiving the bed made with tender leaves, on the 
banks of the Tamasa, Shri Rama with Sita and Lakshmana 
rested there. 
Finding Shri Rama and Sita sleeping, Lakshmana, leaving 
his seat, recounted the excellent virtues of Rama to the 
charioteer. Lakshmana thus passed the whole night till the 
sun rose, conversing with Sumantra on the attributes of Rama. 
In this manner, on the banks of the Tamasa, among herds 
of cattle, Shri Rama and those who had followed him, passed 
the night. At dawn, Shri Rama rose and seeing the people 
still asleep, said to his virtuous brother Lakshmana : — 
" O Lakshmana, see how these people, abandoning their 
homes and property, to follow uss are sleeping under the trees. 
It seems that they, vowing to bring us back, will give up their 
lives rather than be false to their determination. Let us, 
therefore, O Brother, leave this place before they wake. When 
we have crossed the Tamasa, there will be no further cause 
for anxiety. By our silent departure, the people of the capital 
of King Ikshwaku, will not, like us, be compelled to sleep 
under the trees. It is the duty of a prince to preserve them 
from suffering and not make them the companions of his 
Shri Lakshmana answered Ramachandra, saying : " O Wise 
One, I accept thy resolve, let us mount the chariot immediately." 
Rama then said to Sumantra : " Speedily prepare the chariot, 
I will proceed towards the forest, let us therefore depart from 
hence without delay." 
The charioteer, hastily yoking the horses to the chariot, 
humbly addressed Rama, saying : " O Great Prince, the chariot 
is now ready, please ascend with Lakshmana and Sita ; may 
prosperity attend thee." 
Shri Rama with his bow, quiver and other weapons, mounted 
the chariot and passed over the swiftly flowing river. Crossing 
the Tamasa, at a short distance from the shore, they traversed 
a rugged path overgrown with briars, and then came to a wide 
road, where they could travel with ease and which was safe from 
any danger. To elude the citizens, Shri Rama said to Sumantra: 
"O Charioteer, drive first towards the south. Having thus 
261 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
driven for a space, return again, so that no trace of us may be 
found." 
Shri Sumantra, following the instructions of Rama, drove 
forward, then returning, stood before Rama. The son of 
Dasaratha, the augmcntcr of the glory of the house of Raghu, 
spoke from the chariot, saying : " NowdrivetowardsTapovana." 
Sumantra, turning the chariot towards the north, proceeded 
in the direction of the forest. 
chapter 47 
Those who have followed Prince Rama find themselves alone 
The night being over and the day having dawned, the citizens 
awoke and not beholding Rama, were overwhelmed with grief, 
not knowing how to act. Seeking here and there, their eyes 
bathed in tears, they were unable to discover by what path 
Shri Rama had departed. Wretched and pale with distress, 
with quivering hearts and utterly dispirited, they broke into 
piteous exclamations, saying : — 
"Cursed be the sleep that veiled our perceptions, now 
we shall not behold the full chested and large-eyed Rama. 
How fruitless is our devotion, since Rama has gone to the forest 
leaving us, his faithful friends, here. Why has Rama who ever 
treated us as his children, left us to enter the forest ? Either we 
will find death here or go to the Himalayas and perish in the 
snow. What avails life without Rama ? Here is dried wood, 
let us collect it and kindling a fire, perish in the flames. What 
shall we say on our return? Shall we tell others we have 
abandoned the mighty armed Rama, who is free from envy 
and a votary of truth ? Alas ! we cannot do so. The wretched 
city with the women, the aged and the children, seeing us return 
without Rama, will be plunged in grief. Having abandoned 
our homes to follow that self-controlled prince, how can we 
venture to face the people without him ? " 
262 
AYODHYA KANDA 
Thus lamenting, with uplifted aims, filled with distress, they 
resembled cows bereft of their young. , Following the track of 
the chariot wheels, they pressed forward, till, losing their trace, 
they became prostrate with grief. Finding no further path to 
follow, they turned back crying : "Alas ! what shall we do ? 
Fate is against us ! " Then, by the way by which they had 
come, they retraced their steps to Ayodhya. 
Shri Rama, failing to return, the people became restless, and 
seeing the capital cheerless, despondent and sorrow-stricken, 
they wept, murmuring to each other : " The city, bereft of 
Rama, has no beauty, it resembles a dried-up river, divested 
of its snakes by an eagle." As the sky without the moon or 
the sea without water, so did the city appear to the people, 
causing their hearts to faint within them. 
Sadly entering their magnificent dwellings, afflicted and 
distraught, they were unable to distinguish one of their own 
relatives from a stranger. 
CHAPTER 48 
Ayodhya without Shri Ramackandra is bereft of beauty 
Thus afflicted, the people of the capital, their eyes streaming 
with tears, longed to give up their lives. Having followed Rama 
to the forest, they became melancholy and appeared to be almost 
lifeless. In their homes, with their wives and sons, they 
lamented bitterly. None rejoiced, none were cheerful, none 
decked out their children to advantage, nor did the women 
adorn themselves ; no fire burnt on the hearth of any home, 
none was glad to recover the wealth he had lost and none 
rejoiced at a sudden increase of riches. Mothers found no 
delight in the return of their first-born after a long absence. 
Every house was filled with wailing ; the husbands returning 
without Rama were upbraided by their wives with bitter words, 
aa an elephant is goaded by its driver. Everywhere was heard : 
" Without beholding Ramachandra, of what use to us are our 
*63 
7HE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
homes, women, wealth, sons or pleasure ? There is only one 
who is truly virtuous and it is Lakshmana, who has followed 
Rama and Sita to the forest ! How fortunate are those lakes 
and rivers filled with lotuses, whose waters, Rama, entering to 
bathe, doth purify ! Beautiful forests, rivers with verdant banks, 
lakes and mountains will be adorned by the presence of Shri 
Ramachandra. Those mountains visited by Rama, recognizing 
their beloved guest, will honour him with due hospitality. 
" The trees also, their branches laden with flowers and buds, 
in which the bees are humming and murmuring, will offer their 
beauty to Rama. The hills will send forth flowers out of season 
and yield fruit and blossom in his honour. The crystal waterfalls 
of varied beauty will gush forth from the mountains to give 
delight to him. The trees, growing on the slope of the 
mountains, will enchant him. Where Rama is, fear and danger 
are banished. The heroic sons of King Dasaratha, even now, 
are but a little distance from us ; come let us follow them. 
There is no happiness save in the service of the holy Feet 
of that illumined One. Verily he is the only Lord of the world, 
the Absolute, the Highest State and our sole support." 
The women of the city, overcome with grief, addressing their 
husbands said : " Let us follow Rama, we will serve Shri Sita, 
you attend on Shri Rama. Remember, Rama will preserve and 
maintain you in the forest, while Shri Sita will grant support 
to us. Of what use is life where the heart is restless and the 
mind bereft of purpose ? If Kaikeyi rule the kingdom setting 
aside the moral law, what delight can we have in children and 
possessions; even our lives will become valueless. Will Kaikeyi 
be solicitous on our account, she, who has abandoned King 
Dasaratha and her son Shri Ramachandra, for the sake of power? 
We swear by our sons that while we live, we will never be slaves 
to Kaikeyi. Who can live happily under the rule of that 
shameless and evil woman who pitilessly exiled the son of the 
king ? Without a ruler the defenceless kingdom will become 
a prey to every misfortune and perish on account of Kaikeyi's 
evil deeds. The king will not long survive the exile of Rama 
and without him the kingdom will be destroyed. Our good 
karma being exhausted we are miserable ; let us either have 
recourse to poison, or follow Rama, or seek some other place and 
264 
AYODHYA KANDA 
live there unknown. By exiling Rama, Sita and Lakshmana, 
through false means we have been made subject to Bharata's 
governance as beasts are lead to the slaughter. Shri Rama, 
a source of delight resembling the full moon, the destroyer of 
his foes, mighty-armed, Lakshmana's elder brother, whose eyes 
are like lotuses, who speaks in gentle accents, who is brave, 
guileless and beloved of the people, will assuredly adorn the 
forest wheresoever he roams." 
The women of the city distressed by their separation from Rama, 
wept and mourned as do the friends of a dying man. Lamenting 
thus, the sun set and the night fell, no sacrificial fires were 
visible, nor did the brahmins, devoted to the study of the Veda, 
intone the sacred texts, or recite the Furanas, and in no dwelling 
was any lamp kindled. The city of Ayodhya, stricken and 
destitute, the stalls of merchandise forsaken, was bereft of beauty 
like the sky divested of stars. The women of Ayodhya, filled 
with sorrow as if their own sons or brothers had been banished, 
wept bitterly, Shri Ramachandra being dearer to them than 
their own children. In the city, no songs or music was heard, 
nor was there dancing or any sign of rejoicing. The merchant 
ceased to expose their merchandise and sat sunk in dejection. 
Thus Ayodhya, without joy or activity, appeared as desolate 
as an ocean without water. 
CHAPTER 49 
The chariot crosses the boundary of Koshala 
Shri Rama, remembering his father's command, had travelled 
far through the night. Day dawned while he was still journey ing ; offering up his morning prayer, he continued on his way, 
soon reaching the southern boundary of Koshala. 
Enjoying the cultivated fields, the forests, and trees laden 
with blossom, he drove on, drawn by swift horses. As he 
passed, he heard the people of the villages and hamlets conversing 
thus : " Woe unto King Dasaratha enslaved by concupiscence. 
265 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Ah ! how hard is the heart of the wicked Kaikeyi, how cruel her 
disposition ; violating the ancient tradition, she has performed 
this evil deed, she who has banished the Prince of Light, who 
is erudite, compassionate and self-controlled. How will the 
daughter of King Janaka, brought up in ease, endure the 
hardships of the forest ? Alas ! The king has no love for his 
son or he would not have abandoned one so perfect, who is 
devoted to the welfare of all." 
Hearing the words of the villagers, Shri Rama pressed on 
quickly and crossed the boundary of Koshala. Then fording 
the river Vedasruti, 8 pure stream, he proceeded south. After 
traversing a great distance, he came to the cool waters of the 
Gaumati flowing towards the sea, with many cows grazing on 
its banks. The swift steeds, restrained by Rama, crossed this 
river and then the Syandika, on whose banks peacocks and ducks 
were heard. Rama here showed Sita the land formerly given 
by Manu to Ikshwaku, a spacious and open country of many 
principalities. Then Shri Rama, whose voice resembled an 
enchanted swan, addressed Sumantra, saying : " O Charioteer, 
when will the day come, when I, returning from the forest in 
company with my parents, will sport in the flowering woods 
of Sarayu ? To hunt in the forest is the prerogative of royal 
sages. It is the favourite pursuit of kings and others also incline 
to it. I do not deem it evil and desire to engage in it when 
the season of my austerities is over.*' 
Thus firm in his purpose, Shri Ramachandra continued to 
converse sweetly with Sumantra. 
CHAPTER 50 
They reach the river Gunga and meet the chief of ferrymen, 
Guha 
Having crossed the boundary of Koshala, Rama, turning his race 
towards Ayodhya, with joined palms, addressed the city: 
266 
AYODHYA KANDA 
" O Ayodhya, Chief of Cities, protected by the kings of the 
House of Ikshwaku, I take leave of thee and of the gods thy 
protectors who dwell with thee. Having fulfilled the command 
of the king, I shall, returning from the forest, again behold thee 
and my parents." 
Then lifting up his arms, Shri Rama, the tears tailing 
from his eyes, addressed the citizens of his father's kingdom : 
"O Ye Who have treated me with the respect and affection 
due to a master, it is not meet that you remain with me, 
now return to your homes and discharge the duties of your 
households." 
Bowing down to Shri Rama, the people circumambulated him 
with reverence and turned homewards, frequently halting, 
weeping and lamenting. Shri Rama, seeing them weeping 
and not yet satisfied with beholding him, told the charioteer 
to drive on speedily and passed beyond their sight as the sun 
sinks out of view at the time of evening. 
Proceeding on his way, Shri Rama beheld prosperous towns 
and villages full of men of charitable, righteous and fearless 
disposition evidenced by the abundance of temples and sacrificial 
pillars of their cities. The gardens filled with mango trees were 
enriched by pools of translucent water with carefully tended 
highways and herds of cattle grazing here and there. Everywhere 
the recitation of the Veda could be heard. From his chariot, 
Shri Rama surveyed the Kingdom of Koshala and passed beyond 
its confines. The sagacious Rama, proceeding through the 
extensive land inhabited by happy and prosperous people, 
enriched by pleasant gardens, came to the southern boundary 
of Koshala and beheld the holy Gunga, adorned by the presence 
of tne sages, with its cool waters flowing in three directions. 
Near the bank of the sacred river, he saw the beautiful 
hermitages, frequented by holy men and pools of limpid water 
visited by celestial nymphs at play. The holy Ganges, honoured 
by deities, titans, celestial musicians and naiads, that sacred 
current, displaying innumerable charming vistas, embellished 
by the gardens of the gods, and which in heaven is named 
the " Stream of Golden Lotuses ", that holy river, the sound 
of whose clashing waves resembles deep laughter, which moving 
rapidly, covered with foam white as snow, flows merrily forwards 
267 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
and falling from the heights on the rocks below, resembles a 
maiden's plaited locks ; sometimes made beautiful by whirlpools, 
here dark and deep, there with the roar of waters, proclaiming 
the presence of Shri Gunga herself ; those sacred waters wherein 
the celestial beings plunge and swim, where white lotuses float, 
bordered by high banks or shelving sands ; there, where swans, 
cranes, and chakur birds are heard, where trees adorn the banks 
and waterlilies float or fields of lotus flowers whose buds re- 
veal their tender beauty carpet the tide. Sometimes the waters, 
reddened by the petals of lotuses, make the river appear like 
a lovely woman attired in a crimson sari ; those sparkling waters, 
green as emerald, where mighty tuskers sport and also the great 
guardian elephants of the earth's four quarters, or those bearing 
the gods, where the sound of Hara ! Hara ! resounds forever. 
Shri Gunga, beautiful as a woman, tastefully adorned with 
brilliant gems ; Shri Gunga, enriched with fruit, flowers and 
birds of every hue, abounding in porpoises, crocodiles and 
serpents ; that sacred stream, falling from the feet of the Blessed 
Vishnu, divine and spotless, the destroyer of others1 sin, having 
sported in the locks of Shri Shiva, thereafter descending on 
earth, through the power of the penance of Bhagiratha. 
Shri Rama, proceeding towards the city of Shringavera, seeing 
the queen of the ocean, the holy Gunga, where the songs of 
the krauncha bird are heard, watching wave on wave rising on 
the sacred stream, that mighty warrior, Rama, said to Sumantra : 
" O Charioteer, let us lodge here. There, under the Ingudi 
tree,1 laden with verdant leaves and blossom, let us rest. O 
Benevolent One, let us linger by the mighty river, whose 
auspicious waters are worshipped by the gods, the danavas, 
serpents, beasts and birds, and let us offer homage there." 
Sumantra and Lakshmana answering " Be it so ", stayed 
the chariot under the Ingudi tree. 
Arriving there, Shri Rama and Lakshmana descended from 
the chariot and Sumantra, unyoking the horses, respectfully 
seated himself facing Rama, at the foot of the tree. 
The king of that country was one, Guha, dear to Rama as 
his own life, by caste a ferryman, but possessing an army and 
designated " King of Watermen ". Hearing that that lion 
1 Ingudi tzee — sacred Fig Tree. 
268 
AYODHYA KANDA 
among men, Shri Rama, had come to bis territory, he to gether with his aged minister and relatives went forth to meet 
the prince. Shri Rama, seeing the chief of ferrymen, from a 
distance, went with Lakshmana to meet and welcome him. 
Perceiving Shri Rama to be in ascetic's garb, Guha, distressed, 
bowing before him, said : " O Prince, let this small kingdom 
be as Ayodhya to thee, please issue thy commands, I am at 
thy service. O Mighty-armed One, it is rare to receive a guest 
so deeply beloved ! " 
Guha then brought excellent dishes of delicious foods, 
together with the arghya and said : " We are thy servants and 
thou art our lord, accept this kingdom and rule it as thine own. 
Here are dishes of various kinds, desserts, liquids, spices, 
excellent beds on which to rest and provender for the horses, 
all at thy disposal." 
Shri Rama answered : " 0 Guha, thou hast come to welcome 
me on foot out of affection, by this I am duly honoured, I am 
pleased with thee." Then taking him in his strong arms and 
embracing him, Shri Rama addressed him in cheerful accents, 
saying : " O Guha, through my good fortune I behold thee and 
thy friends in good health. Is all well among thy people and 
with thy possessions ? O Friend, having renounced the accept ance of gifts, I am not able to partake of what thou hast offered 
me with love ; know that having assumed the robe of kusha grass 
and the antelope skin, I live on fruit and roots ; X am the pro tector of dharma and my father's servant. Being an ascetic, I 
may only accept a little grass for the horses and nothing beside — 
by this alone, I am fully welcomed. These horses of my father 
Dasaratha are dear to him, they having received oats, grass and 
pure water, I am honoured in full measure." 
On this, Guha commanded his servants to provide drink and 
provender for the horses. Then Rama assuming a dress of bark 
performed his evening devotions, drinking the water brought 
by Shri Lakshmana. Then Lakshmana washed the feet of Rama 
and Sita who had laid themselves down beneath the Ingudi tree 
and seated himself respectfully near them. Guha with Sumantra 
seated near Shri Lakshmana who, armed with bow and arrow, 
carefully guarded Rama, spent the night in holy converse. 
Rama, the wise and illustrious son of King Dasaratha, deserving 
269 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
every comfort and who now, lying on the ground, suffered 
adversity, passed the night undisturbed in deep sleep. 
chapter 5 x 
The night is spent on the bank of the sacred river 
Guha addressed Shri Lakshmana who was humbly guarding 
his royal brother, and said : " 0 Friend, rest at ease on this 
soft bed prepared for thee. We are fitted for the forest life, 
but thou accustomed to ease, rest now, we will watch during 
the night and guard Shri Rama from harm, none is dearer to me 
on earth, I swear to thee in truth. To gratify Shri Rama, I 
will acquire fame, righteousness, wealth and pleasure.1 I, with 
my bow and arrow, attended by my kindred, will watch over 
Shri Rama, now asleep with Sita. Wandering daily in the forest, 
nothing there is unknown to me, even if a powerful enemy 
attacked me in the forest, I could withstand him." 
Lakshmana answered : " I have full faith in the power of 
thy protection, nor do I fear any, but how, forgetful of dharma, 
can I refrain from watching over Shri Rama ? Beholding the 
chief heir of Dasaratha, sovereign of the earth, lying on the 
ground with the daughter of King Janaka, how should I dare 
to rest while he is sleeping ? " 
See Nishada2 ! That Mighty Prince, Shri Rama, whom none 
dared challenge, sleeps on a bed of straw. That Great One 
obtained by King Dasaratha by the merit of charity, austerity 
and devotion, having become an ascetic, his aged sire will not 
long survive and then will the earth become a widow. O 
Nishada, I deem the women wailing and lamenting at our 
departure have become silent and the royal palace also, but 
I fear the king, Kaushalya and my mother, will not outlast 
this night. Consoled by Shatrughna, my mother may endure 
a little while, but Queen Kaushalya, the mother of this hero, 
1 The four legitimate aim§ in life. 
1 The Nishada is the mountain tribe to which Guha belonged. 
AYODHYA KANDA 
will surely yield up her life without Rama. Alas ! Ayodhya, 
the repository of wealth and inhabited by those who love Rama, 
will perish through the distress caused by the king's death. 
How can the king live without beholding his beloved and 
virtuous eldest son? Queen Kaushalya also will perish, nor 
can my mother long survive Kaushalya's death. Alas ! The 
whole structure of the king's purpose has fallen in ruins; desiring 
to appoint Rama as his regent, he will leave this world still 
cherishing this hope. He is fortunate who, attending the last 
hours of the king, performs his obsequies — and then ranges 
the city full of charming courts, palaces and temples with 
intersecting streets where lovely courtesans are seen ; that city 
abounding in splendid chariots, horses and elephants, resounding 
with trumpets, possessing every amenity, filled with happy 
people, enriched by parks and gardens where conferences and 
joyous gatherings are held daily. When shall we, returning 
from the forest, walk in the royal city ? May King Dasaratba 
continue to live, so that we may behold that excellent monarch 
on our return, with Shri Rama the Upholder of Truth." 
Thus lamenting and afflicted, Shri Lakshmana, keeping watch 
over Rama, passed the night. Prince Lakshmana uttering words 
of truth and affection concerning his parents and elders, 
spoke thus to Guha who, grieving and disquieted, wept like 
an elephant in pain. 
CHAPTER 52 
Sumantra is ordered to return ; Shri Rama, Sita 
and Lakshmana cross the holy river 
The day having dawned, the broad-chested and illustrious Rama 
addressed the virtuous Prince Lakshmana. " Lo ! the goddess 
Night has fled and the sun is about to rise. O listen how the 
blackbird is singing and the peacock's cry is heard in the forest. 
Let us cross the swift-flowing Bhagirathi, which runs towards 
the sea." 
27X T 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Shri Lakshmana, hearing Shri Rama's command, standing 
before his brother, called Guha and Sumantra. Guha divining 
Shri Rama's purpose, summoned his ministers and said to them : 
" Speedily bring a good boat, stout and strong, capable of taking 
Shri Rama across." 
The minister according to Guha's instruction brought an 
excellent boat and said : " Sir, the boat is ready." Then Guha, 
with joined palms, approaching Shri Rama thus addressed him : 
" O Lord, thy boat is at hand, what further dost thou require 
of me ? O Lion among men, O Prince, O Thou observer of 
great vows, the boat capable of crossing the river flowing towards 
the sea, is here, please enter it." 
The glorious Prince Rama answered Guha saying : " Thou 
hast supplied me with all I could desire, now place the baggage 
on the boat." The princes donning their quivers, and bearing 
their bows, came to the place where the boat was waiting. 
Then Sumantra approaching the righteous Rama with bowed 
head and joined palms, said : " What commands hast thou for 
me, O Lord?" Touching Sumantra with his right hand, 
Shri Rama replied: "O Virtuous Sumantra, now return to 
the king and serve him with vigilance, I no longer need thee. 
O Friend, leaving the chariot, I will enter the forest on foot." 
Sumantra receiving the order to return, imagined himself 
already separated from Rama and full of grief exclaimed : " O 
Lord, none in the kingdom desires thee to enter the forest with 
Sita and Lakshmana like a common man. When I behold thee, 
compassionate and guileless, facing great adversity, I regard as 
vain, compassion, simplicity, the brahmacharya vow and the 
study of the Veda ! O Prince, dwelling in the forest with Sita 
and Lakshmana will bring thee renown equal to one who 
conquers the three worlds ; but we, separated from thee, O 
Rama, are doomed and will fall under the sway of the sinful 
Kaikeyi." 
The wise Sumantra, certain of Rama's departure, filled with 
distress, wept long and bitterly. At length, restraining his tears 
he purified himself with water, and was then addressed by Rama 
who spoke to him in gentle accents, saying: "Among the 
ministers of the house of Ikshwaku, none is so kind a friend. 
Wilt thou, therefore, act in such wise that the king be freed 
27a 
AYODHYA KANDA 
from grief? The Lord of the earth is aged, his mind confused 
and he is tormented with desire, therefore I ask thee to minister 
unto him. Whatever the king commands, through affection 
for Queen Kaikeyi, do thou perform. Kings rule to fulfil their 
desires. O Sumantra, act in such a way that the kitfg be not 
displeased, and that he may not sink under the weight of 
affliction. When thou dost approach him, who was hitherto 
a stranger to suffering, offer salutations on my behalf and say : 
* Having renounced Ayodhya and entered the forest, Shri Rama, 
Lakshmana and Sita suffer no distress ; fourteen years having 
passed, thou shalt soon see them return ! * 
" Deliver thus my message of affection again and again to 
the king, to my mother Kaushalya, the other queens and also 
Kaikeyi. Bowing to the feet of my mother Kaushalya, tell hei 
that all is well with me and also with Sita and Lakshmana. 
Advise the king to send for Bharata speedily and when he is 
come, let him be installed as regent. Taking Prince Bharata 
in thine arms, appoint him king ; thou shalt thus be freed from 
the grief caused by this separation. Thereafter, let Bharata, 
on my behalf be instructed to treat our mothers with equal 
affection and with the same honour as is due to the king. Let 
him look on Sumitra and my mother Kaushalya as his own 
mother Kaikeyi. Do thou say : * If thou accept the kingdom 
to please the king, thy fame and happiness in both worlds 
are assured '." 
Having spoken thus, Shri Rama desired to dismiss Sumantra 
from his presence bearing the message, but the minister, deeply 
distressed, addressed him, saying : " O Ramachandra, forgive 
me if I utter words lacking in reverence, urged by my devotion 
for thee, nor deem me to be a hypocrite. O Raghava, Ayodhya, 
by thy departure, resembles one afflicted by the loss of a son, 
how shall I return there without thee ? Seeing the chariot 
without thee, the people will be filled with distress, the heart 
of the city will be riven in twain. Though thou hast travelled 
far, yet in the hearts of the citizens of Ayodhya thou art still 
present with them. Assuredly the people have neither partaken 
of food nor water in thine absence. At the time of thy departure, 
O Prince, thou wast acquainted with their grief, and didst witness 
their weeping and lamentation. On beholding the empty 
273 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
chariot, their sorrow will be increased a thousandfold. On 
returning to Ayodhya, with what words shall I address thy 
mother ? Shall I say * I have left thy son at the home of thy 
brother, do not grieve.' ? How can I utter such a falsehood, 
yet how -can I relate the truth to her? Those noble steeds 
that have drawn the chariot bearing thee, Lakshmana and Sita, 
how shall they be driven without thee ? O Sinless Prince, I 
cannot return to Ayodhya without thee, therefore let me remain 
with thee in the forest. If in spite of my prayer, thou still 
renouncest me, I will, with the chariot enter a blazing fire. O 
Prince, whatever beings seek to frustrate thy life of devotion 
in the forest, I will repel with my chariot. Through thee, I 
am enabled to drive the chariot, now be gracious enough to let 
me enter the forest with thee. Accept me, therefore, as thy 
protector and let me enter the forest, I ask thee with exceeding 
love. O Hero, should these excellent steeds serve thee in the 
forest, they will acquire a high spiritual state. O Prince, by 
whatever means I may serve thee in the forest, I would esteem it 
more than residence in heaven or in Ayodhya. Without thee, 
I am unable to return to the capital, as the sinful Indra was 
unable to enter Amaravati. It is my highest desire when thy 
period of exile shall be over to convey thee to the capital once 
more. O Rama, fourteen years with thee will pass like a moment, 
while without thee, they will seem like a thousand years. 
O Friend of those devoted to thee, I have resolved to stay in 
the forest with the son of my lord. How can'st thou abandon 
thy devoted friend, who only seeks to do bis duty ? " 
Thus repeatedly besought by the minister Sumantra, Shri 
Rama answered him saying : " O Lover of thy Master, I know 
of thy devotion to me, but hear the reasons which prompt me 
to send thee hence to Ayodhya. 
" Seeing thee return to the capital, my mother Kaikeyi, 
convinced I have entered the forest will be satisfied and will 
no longer reproach the king, charging him with falsehood and 
unrighteousness. I desire that my mother Kaikeyi should enjoy 
the prosperous kingdom governed by her son Bharata, therefore, 
to please me, return to the capital and deliver the message with 
which I have entrusted thee." 
Thus Rama, offering explanation to Sumantra then spoke 
274 
AYODHYA KANDA 
words of reason and encouragement to Guha, saying : " O Guha, 
it is not propei for me to dwell in the forest in which my friends 
reside, therefore, constructing a hut of leaves and twigs elsewhere 
I will live as an ascetic. For the spiritual welfare of my 
father, I, Sita and Lakshmana, with matted hair following the 
ascetic discipline, will reside in the forest. Bring me, therefore, 
the milk of the Bhurja tree.1 Guha obeyed the instruction of the 
prince, whereupon Rama poured the viscous liquid on his own 
head and also on the head of Lakshmana ! Thus Shri Rama, 
that Lion among men, and his brother Lakshmana appeared as 
ascetics and in their robes of bark with matted locks looked 
charming. Taking the vow of brahmacharya, the two brothers 
addressed Guha saying : " O Guha, do not neglect thine armies, 
thy treasury, thy forces of defence and thy people. A kingdom 
is governed through diligence and exertion." 
Taking leave of Guha, Shri Rama with Sita and Lakshmana 
went quickly towards the Ganges. Seeing the boat near the 
bank of the swiftly flowing river and desirous of crossing over it, 
Rama said to Lakshmana : " O Lion among men, hold the boat 
firm and aid the gentle Sita to board it, then you, too, enter it." 
Acting on his brother's command, Shri Lakshmana first 
assisted the daughter of the King of Mithila and then boarded 
the boat himself. Then the resplendent Rama followed, being 
the last to enter and Guha ordered his servants to row them 
over the sacred river. 
Occupying his seat in the boat, Prince Rama began to recite 
the Vedic mantra for the safe conduct of all. Performing the 
Achmana2 ritual, he offered salutations to Shri Gunga and 
Lakshmana also made obeisance to the sacred stream. Shri 
Rama once more bade farewell to the charioteer, the army and 
Guha, and asked the helmsman to row to the other side. The 
boat moved swiftly to the sound of the oars. 
Arriving in midstream, the delighted Sita, with joined palms, 
adored Shri Gunga, saying : " O Gunga, may this son of 
Dasaratha, obeying the commands of his father, be protected 
by thee. May he, passing fourteen years in the forest, 'return 
again with Lakshmana and myself. Then, O Devi, O Blessed 
1 Bhurja tree — a ipecacs of birch. 
1 Achmana — a purificatory ceremony. 
*75 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Gunga, returning with them, I will worship thee. 0 Gunga, 
thou art the fulfiller of pious desires. O Thou Tripartite 
Goddess, reaching to the abode of Brahma, and appearing in 
the mortal realm as the consort of the ocean king, O Beautiful 
One, I bow down to thee and adore thee. When, returning 
safely from the forest, Shri Rama occupies the throne, then I, 
desiring to gratify thee, will give a hundred thousand cows, 
abundant grain and beautiful apparel to the brahmins in charity. 
Returning to Ayodhya, I will offer a sacrifice of a hundred jars 
of wine and rice to thee. I will worship all the gods dwelling 
on thy banks and all the sacred places such as Prayaga and Kashi. 
O Sinless One, grant that Rama and Lakshmana, free from sin, 
completing the term of their exile, return again to Ayodhya." 
Thus worshipping the Gunga, the Promoter of delight, they 
reached the further bank. Then Rama, chief of men, leaving 
the boat on the southern shore, proceeded to the forest with 
Lakshmana and Janaki, and addressed Shri Lakshmana, saying : 
" O Son of Sumitra, do thou carefully protect Shri Sita in the 
lonely and also the frequented areas of the forest We must 
guard her in this unknown and uninhabited place, therefore, 
O Lakshmana, do thou go before and let Sita follow thee, I will 
walk behind to safeguard you both, let us defend each other, 
O Prince. So far, Shri Sita has not made trial of her strength, 
but from to-day she must endure the hardships of a forest life. 
To-day, the daughter of King Janaka will enter the forest where 
no man dwells, nor are there fields or gardens there, but hard 
and arid ground with yawning chasms everywhere." 
Shri Lakshmana, thus instructed, went ahead with Sita 
following him, Shri Rama coming after. 
Meantime, Sumantra, on the further bank, followed Raghava 
with his eyes, and overcome with grief, wept bitterly. Shri 
Rama, resplendent as the earth's guardians, giver of boons, 
having crossed the river Gunga, came to the land of Batsya. 
Thereafter, the two brothers hunted the deer and wild boar, 
and other beasts and growing hungry, fed on roots and berries, 
as ordained, resting at eventide beneath a tree. 
276 
AYODHYA KANDA 
CHAPTER 5 3 
Determined to follow their destiny they enter upon exile 
The Delighter of the World, Shri Rama, sitting beneath a tree 
performed his evening devotion (Sandhya) and then addressed 
Shri Lakshmana thus : " O Brother, this is our first night in 
the forest without Sumantra, do not be dispirited. From now 
on at night but one of us shall sleep, since the protection of 
Shri Sita is our care. O Lakshmana, gathering leaves and 
grass, let us prepare a bed and lay ourselves down." 
Shri Rama, accustomed to a sumptuous and princely couch, 
lay that night on the bare earth. Conversing with Shri Laksh mana, he said : " O Lakshmana, it may be that King Dasaratha 
slept fitfully this day, but Kaikeyi having realised her ambition, 
is surely satisfied. I fear that she, avid for the kingdom, will 
slay the king 'ere Bharata returns. The aged monarch is 
defenceless, a slave to Kaikeyi and subject to desire; bereft 
of me, how will the wretched king safeguard himself? Viewing 
the king's downfall and his subjection in matters of desire, it 
would seem that concupiscence is more powerful than wealth 
or virtue. O Brother, what foolish man, swayed by a woman, 
would abandon an obedient son like me? Bharata alone is 
fortunate, who, with his consort, having acquired Ayodhya, 
will enjoy the kingdom. 
" Prince Bharata will become the ruler of the whole empire 
since the life of the king is drawing to its close and I have 
entered the forest. He who gives up righteousness and dis regarding prosperity, seeks to gratify his desires, like King 
Dasaratha, falls a prey to sorrow. O Handsome Prince, I deem 
that Kaikeyi entered our house to destroy the king, to send me 
into exile and to install Bharata as ruler of the kingdom. O 
Brother, I fear that Kaikeyi, blinded by power, may persecute 
Kaushalya and Sumitra, they being our mothers. Do thou, 
lest Kaushalya and Sumitra suffer, go to Ayodhya, for my sake. 
I, with Sita, will enter the Dandaka forest. Go thou to Ayodhya 
and become the protector of the defenceless Queen Kaushalya. 
The evilly-disposed Kaikeyi, through enmity to us, may cause 
277 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
injury to our mothers. O Lakshmana, assuredly in some 
previous birth, my mother has deprived other women of their 
sons and is reaping the fruit of that action in this life. Woe 
unto me, that I should have to abandon my mother who nurtured 
me with exceeding love and should now enjoy felicity. O 
Lakshmana, may no woman give birth to a son like me, who am 
the source of infinite distress to my mother. O Brother, a 
maina1 taught by me, cried in the hearing of my mother, ' Bite 
the enemy's foot while you are in his mouth \a O Lakshmana, 
my unfortunate mother is to-day sunk in an ocean of grief and I 
am not able to succour her. Better it were that she had had 
no son ! Assuredly she is an object of compassion, mourning 
in my separation. Alas ! what extremity of grief is hers to-day ! 
O Lakshmana, should I give way to wrath, I were able to subdue 
the world not to speak of Ayodhya, but for the upholding of 
righteousness, I may not demonstrate my power. Should I do 
so, I should incur sin and endanger the life hereafter ; never 
will I take the kingdom by force." 
Thus lamenting in the lonely forest, Rama, abandoning 
restraint, passed the night in tears. 
When, ceasing to lament, Lakshmana beheld Rama like an 
extinguished fire or a calm sea, he thus addressed him : " O 
Great Hero, deprived of thee, Ayodhya is without splendour, 
as the night, at the setting of the sun, but, O Rama, it is unworthy 
of thee to grieve, sapping the courage of Sita and myself. 
Like fish without water, we cannot live an instant without thee. 
O Great One, I do not desire to see my father, my brother 
Shatrughna or my mother Sumitra, nor even heaven itself." 
Hearing the words of Lakshmana, full of good counsel, Shri 
Ramachandra arose and seated himself by Sita on the bed of 
leaves. Determined to follow his destiny, Shri Rama entered 
upon the period of exile. From that day, the two great princes 
of the house of Raghu dwelt in the lonely forest, serene and 
fearless like two lions dwelling on the summit of a mountain. 
1 Maina or Mina — a small pcrcha, the size of a sparrow, able to repeat words. 
1 The meaning is Rama had a bird which was taught to speak. Seeing aparrot 
caught by a hawk, it cried out : " O, Parrot, bite the enemy's foot ." (That it, 
before you are devoured.) 
278 
AYODHYA KANDA 
CHAPTER 54 
They spend the night at Prayaga in the hermitage of the Sage 
As the sun rose in a cloudless sky, having passed the night 
under a banyan tree, they set out from thence and proceeded 
to where the Gunga and the Yamuna meet, flowing through 
the vast forest. The two illustrious brothers journeying 
onwards beheld beautiful vistas in the forest, hitherto unseen 
by them, and they, sometimes reclining at ease, delighted in 
the blossoming trees. The day being nearly over, Shri Rama 
said to the son of Sumitra : " O Lakshmana, look towards 
Prayaga,1 smoke is rising like the fire-god's banner ; undoubt edly, it is a sign that the hermitage of holy Bharadwaja is near. 
We have assuredly reached the junction of the Gunga and 
Yamuna, the sound of these mighty rivers clashing together 
is clearly heard. Wood-cutters have hewn the logs from mighty 
trees and many are cut down in the hermitage of the holy sage." 
Conversing thus, as the sun was setting, the two great archers 
reached the confluence of the Gunga and Yamuna, and the 
hermitage of Bharadwaja. Desiring to look upon the holy sage, 
they halted respectfully at some little distance from the place. 
Then Rama slowly and reverently entered the hermitage, 
beholding there the omniscient Sage Bharadwaja of mighty vows, 
the conqueror of time by sacred discipline. Surrounded by his 
disciples, offering oblations into the holy fire, they beheld the 
rishi, and Rama with Sita and Lakshmana paid obeisance to him. 
Rama said : " O Blessed and Mighty Sage, we are Rama and 
Lakshmana, the sons of King Dasaratha, and this, my wife, 
is the daughter of Videha's King, this fortunate one is following 
me to the lonely Tapovana. My royal sire has sent me into 
exile and the son of Sumitra, my younger brother, ever dear 
to me, taking the brahmacharya vow, has followed me. O 
Blessed Lord, fulfilling the behests of our father, we shall enter 
the sacred forest and, practising dharma, live on roots and 
berries." 
1 Prayaga — The confluence of the Ganges and Yamuna, a lacied spot. 
279 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
The virtuous sage, Bharadwaja, hearing the words of Prince 
Rama, offering them madhupaika1 together with the arghya, 
and water wherewith to wash their feet, thereafter gave them 
various roots and fruits. Then the holy sage prepared a resting 
place for them. The Maharishi Bharadwaja, seated amidst the 
deer and birds, thus honoured Rama, enquiring as to bis welfare. 
Rama receiving the worship of the great rishi, reflected on the 
words spoken to him : " O Prince, I behold thee after a long 
time, I have heard that thou wast exiled without cause. Remain 
here at ease and in peace, at this sacred and pleasant place 
where the two great rivers meet.'* 
Shri Rama, ever devoted to the good of all, answered : " O 
Lord, thy hermitage is close to the abodes of men and many 
will come hither to gaze on Sita and myself. I therefore do 
not deem it wise to linger here. O Blessed One, do thou inform 
me of a lonely place, where Sita, the daughter of Janaka, may 
live in happiness." 
In gentle accents Shri Bharadwaja replied : " O Child, ten 
miles from here, there is a mountain, purified by the presence 
of many sages who dwell there, beautiful and pleasing to the 
sight, there do thou abide. Monkeys, bears and chimpanzees 
wander there freely. That mountain is Chittrakuta, delightful 
as Gandhamadana. Those beholding the peaks of Chittrakuta, 
obtain spiritual merit, their minds admit no sin and, living there, 
they win divine rewards. Many sages, performing austerities 
there for thousands of years, have entered heaven in their 
embodied state. 0 Rama, this lovely place is a fit residence 
for thee, I deem, if thou will not remain here with me until the 
period of thine exile be past." Thus Bharadwaja honoured 
Rama with Sita and Lakshmana offering them every mark of 
hospitality due to their royal state. So in the hermitage of 
the great sage at Prayaga, Rama spent the night in converse 
on ancient times. Relieved of weariness, Shri Rama with 
Lakshmana and Sita passed the night pleasantly in the sacred 
hermitage. When morning dawned, Shri Ramachandra, 
approaching the great sage made resplendent by virtue of austere 
practices, thus addressed him : " O Thou devoted to truth, 
1 Madhuparka — A traditional offering, a mixture of curds, butter, honey 
and the milk of coconut. 
280 
AYODHYA KANDA 
we have passed the night at ease in thy hermitage now grant us 
leave to depart to the place appointed by thee." 
Shri Bharadwaja then made answer. " O Rama, set out for 
the mountain Chittrakuta abounding in honey, roots and fruit, 
worthy to be thy dwelling, covered with trees and the abode 
of heavenly beings ; there, peacocks cry and mighty tuskers 
roam. Go then to that sacred place, which is pleasant and filled 
with fruit and flowers, and where elephants and deer wander 
through the woods. There, lingering with Sita by the springs 
and waterfalls, the mountain slopes and peaceful caves, thy mind 
will find delight. O Rama, do thou depart to dwell on that 
high and lovely mountain thronged with elephants and various 
beasts, where the tittibha1 and the kokila* sing." 
chapter 55 
They cross the Yamuna and travel on 
Shri Rama and Lakshmana, the conquerors of their foes, having 
passed the night in Prayaga, offered obeisance to the sage and 
proceeded towards Chittrakuta. On their departure, Shri 
Bharadwaja gave them his blessing as a father blesses his son 
and addressing Rama, that hero of the region of truth, said : 
" O Great One, proceeding west of the junction of the rivers, 
on the bank of the Yamuna, which flows into the swiftly-moving 
Gunga, thou wilt find a worn-out ferryboat. Do thou pass over 
the stream by means of a rod to which, at either end, an 
upturned pitcher is hung. On the opposite shore, thou wilt 
behold a mighty green-leaved fig-tree surrounded by many 
others. The leaves of this tree are of a dark green hue and it 
is frequented by siddhas. Reaching that place, do thou, with 
Janaki pray for the accomplishment of thy legitimate desires. 
Rest there awhile, then pass beyond it ; reaching Nilvan at a 
mile's distance, there many sala, jamnu and badri3 trees are seen, 
1 Tittibhm — A bird Parra Jacana or GocnsU. 
1 Kokila — The black or Indian cuckoo. 
* Sala, jamnu and badri trees — for trees see separate glossary. 
28l 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
that is the way to Chittrakuta and often have I journeyed on 
that path. Beautiful it is and fixe from thorns and there is 
no danger there of a forest fire." 
After pointing out the way to Shri Rama, the sage turned back 
to his own hermitage. 
Offering salutations to the saint, Shri Rama, having taken 
his leave, said to Lakshmana : " O Lakshmana, surely we are 
fortunate in that the holy Rishi has treated us so graciously." 
Conversing thus, the two princes proceeded onwards, Shri Sita 
walking before them, and came to the bank of the swiftly-flowing 
Yamuna. Then they began to consider how they should pass 
over it, and collecting some wood constructed a raft, tying 
together lengths of dried bamboo and filling the interstices 
with kusha grass. Then Lakshmana, spreading the branches 
of jambu and vettas trees, made Sita a comfortable seat. Shri 
Sita shyly holding the hand of her lord, Shri Rama placed his 
Beloved on the raft with her clothing and ornaments beside her. 
Thereafter placing the axes and the chest covered with deerskins, 
containing their weapons there, the two brothers began to sail. 
Arriving in mid-stream, Shri Sita, bowing low, prayed to the 
holy river saying : " O Devi, forgive us for passing over thee, 
grant that my lord may fulfil his vow without obstructions. 
When I return, to please thee I will offer a thousand cows 
in charity." Then with joined palms, she said : " May the 
Lord of the House of Ikshwaku return in peace to the 
capital." 
Having crossed the rippling Yamuna, the swift daughter of 
the sun, they reached its southern bank; there abandoning the 
raft, they entered the woods and the river bank and came to 
the heavily shadowed fig tree. 
Shri Sita said : " O Mighty Tree, I make obeisance to thee, 
may my lord fulfil his vow, so that I may again behold Shri 
Kaushalya and Queen Sumitra." 
Then Sita circumambulated the tree with reverence and Rama 
beholding the lovely Sita praying for his welfare, said to 
Lakshmana : " Do thou go forward with Sita of whom no ill 
word has ever been uttered, who is ever obedient to me and is 
dearer than life itself. 0 Chief of Men, I, with my weapons 
will follow after. Whatever fruit or flower the daughter of 
282 
AYODHYA KANDA 
Janaka may desire in the forest, do thou gather for her, so that 
her mind may find delight," 
Shri Sita, between the two princes, walked like a female 
elephant guarded by two tuskers ; the daughter of Janaka, 
beholding many things, formerly unknown to her, questioned 
Rama concerning every tree, shrub and climbing plant. Seeing 
many beautiful trees covered with blossom, Shri Lakshmana 
brought the princess all she desired. Viewing the river and its 
sandy banks caressed by the waves, where swans and cranes 
called, Shri Sita was filled with happiness. 
Having travelled some distance, the two valiant brothers slew 
many deer for food, then, with Sita, passed through the pleasant 
woods, ringing with the cries of peacocks and frequented by 
elephants and monkeys. 
Perceiving a delightful and sheltered place which found 
favour with Sita, they lodged there free from fear. 
CHAPTER 56 
They reach the mountain Chittrakuta and build a hut 
The night being past, Shri Rama, slowly waking, roused the 
sleeping Lakshmana and addressed him, saying : " O Laksh mana, how beautiful are the parrots, cuckoos, mainas and other 
birds which are heard here ! O Parantapa,1 this is the hour 
to pursue our journey, let us go hence, O Prince ! " 
Shri Lakshmana, renouncing sleep, shook off his drowsiness 
and rose refreshed. All of them rising and bathing in the river 
Yamuna, offered up their morning prayers. Then, taking the 
path through the palasa* forest, they proceeded towards Chitt rakuta as directed by the holy sage. 
Walking with Lakshmana, Rama now spoke to the lotus-eyed 
Sita, saying : " O Daughter of King Videha, see how the spring 
has dressed the palasa trees in sweet-scented blossom, these 
1 Parantapa — Oppressor of the enemy. 
* Palais or Palauut or Panata — bread fruit. 
283 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALM1KI 
crimson flowers glowing like fire and the branches decked with 
flowers as if adorned with garlands. How rich in bloom are 
the bilwa1 trees untouched by man who is not able to approach 
them. Here we can easily gather food. See, O Lakshmana, 
hanging on the trees, the honeycombs at least a drona* in size, 
covered with bees. How charmingly the waterbird is singing 
and the peacock answering with its call, and look ! the earth 
is half concealed with flowers. Here are the lofty peaks of 
Chittrakuta where countless birds sing and herds of elephants 
wander. Somewhere on Chittrakuta a level field must he midst 
groves of trees, a pure and stainless place, where we will dwell." 
The two brothers, in company with Sita, conversing thus, 
reached the pleasant and captivating mountain of Chittrakuta. 
Coming to that place, on which there were birds of many 
kinds, abounding in various roots and pleasant fruits and clear 
transparent pools, Rama said to Lakshmana : " O Gentle 
Brother, how pleasant is this hill covered with shady trees, 
creepers and fruits of many kinds, appearing delightful and 
where we may abide unmolested. Within the forest, many sages 
dwell, this place is meet to be our hermitage." 
Thus resolving, Rama, Lakshmana and Sita came to the 
hermitage of the Sage Valmiki and, with reverence, offered 
obeisance to him. The virtuous sage, full of joy, paid homage 
to them, asking them to be seated saying : " You are most 
welcome ! " 
Shri Rama, presenting himself together with his brother and 
Sita, related the cause of his exile to the sage and then addressed 
Lakshmana, saying : " O Brother, bring strong wood and let us 
build a hut in this place. O Excellent Prince, here do I wish 
to dwell." 
Shri Lakshmana thereupon brought many pieces of wood, 
hewn from the trees, and erected a hut thatched with leaves. 
When Shri Rama beheld that firm and pleasant hut furnished 
with a door, he said to the devoted Lakshmana: " O Lakshmana, 
bring venison with which we may worship the deity of the 
dwelling-place 1 Since we purpose to live here long, we should 
enter it with peaceful intention I O Son of Sumitra, having 
1 Bilwa — bel tree or wood apple. — Aegle Marmdas. 
1 Prona — a measure of corn approximately 99 pound*. 
284 
AYODHYA KANDA 
killed a black deer, bring it here speedily. Let us follow the 
scriptural ordinance in this matter." 
Shri Lakshmana, having obeyed his brother's command, Rama 
said : " Now dress the meat and we will offer it as a sacrifice. 
Hasten, O Brother, this is an auspicious hour." 
The illustrious son of Sumitra slew a black antelope and 
roasted it in the flames. When it was dressed and the blood 
drained from it, Lakshmana addressed Raghava, saying : " O 
Godlike One, I have prepared the flesh of the black deer, now 
offer up the sacrifice to propitiate the god." 
The devout and resplendent Rama, skilled in silent prayer 
and sacrifice, having bathed, recited the holy texts, offering 
homage to the gods, then entered the hut, his heart filled with 
joy. Having adored Rudra and Vishnu for the purification of 
the dwelling, he read the Peace Chant and other propitiatory 
prayers. Repeating the japa1 and bathing in the river, he offered 
oblations for the expiation of sins. He then erected altars in 
the eight directions for the worship of different gods and 
gratifying the deities presiding over the elements with offerings 
of flowers, garlands, fruits, cooked meats and the recitation of 
Vedic mantrans, he, together with Sita, entered the delightful 
hut, thatched with leaves, set up in a suitable place, sheltered 
from the wind. 
Shri Rama, of subdued senses, dwelt happily in that habita tion, built in the forest, the abode of beasts and birds, abounding 
in trees and flowers, where elephants wandered and the cries 
of wild beasts re-echoed. 
Living on the pleasant mountain, Chittrakuta, by the banks 
of the river Malati, Rama forgot the capital and remembered 
his renunciation no more. 
1 Japa — silent prayer— -usually the repetition of a sacred formula. 
285 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 57 
Sumantra returns to the stricken city of Ayodhya 
Separated from Rama, Guha was filled with distress. Con versing long with the charioteer, he perceived Rama reach the 
southern shore, and turned homewards. 
Sumantra hearing fully from the men of Shrangverpira of 
Rama's arrival at Prayaga, his meeting and residence with the 
Rishi Bharadwaja and his journey towards Chittrakuta, bade 
farewell to Guha and yoking his horses to the chariot, with a 
sorrowful heart, started for Ayodhya. Speedily passing through 
flower-laden forests and viewing the rivers, pools, villages and 
towns, he reached the stricken city of Ayodhya on the evening 
of the third day. Seeing the silent city, he reflected : " Has 
the city with its sovereign, men, elephants and horses been 
consumed by the fire of grief, caused by the separation from 
Rama?" 
Pondering thus, in his swiftly borne chariot, Sumantra reached 
the gate of the inner city and entered it. There innumerable 
people rushed towards the chariot and surrounding it, cried : 
" Where is Shri Rama ? " " Where is Shri Rama ? " and 
Sumantra answered : " Having reached the banks of the Gunga, 
the virtuous Rama ordered me to return, therefore, I have come." 
Then the people, finding Rama had crossed the sacred river, 
their eyes filled with tears, sighing heavily, cried : " O Rama, 
O Rama ! " and all exclaimed with one voice, " Alas ! We 
are deprived of the sight of Rama, we are destroyed ! We shall 
no more behold Rama, the distributor of gifts and performer 
of sacrifices, who sat in our assemblies and who resembled the 
beautifully adorned Meru mountain ! Alas ! Where is Shri 
Rama, our protector, acquainted with the need of each and the 
happiness of all!" 
Then Sumantra, proceeding further, heard on every side, 
through the lattices of the houses the wailing of women 
mourning for Rama and hearing their lamentations on the royal 
highway, the charioteer, covering his face, passed quickly on 
towards the palace of the king. 
286 
AYODHYA KANDA 
Descending with all speed from his chariot, he passed beyond 
the seven gates and entered the royal residence. Seeing 
Sumantra return alone, the women, seated at the balconies and 
windows of the palace, seven-stories high, languishing in Rama's 
separation, broke into loud lamentations. Exchanging glances, 
their eyes streaming with tears, in broken accents they gave 
expression to their grief. He heard, too, the feeble wailing 
of the queens ofKingDasaratha, saying: " What will Sumantra, 
who went forth with Rama and has returned alone, say to the 
stricken Queen Kaushalya ? Surely the human soul suffers pain 
and anxiety more readily than joy, since Queen Kaushalya still 
lives separated from Rama." 
Hearing the words of the queens and weighed down with 
sorrow, Sumantra entered the residence of the king and passing 
through the eighth door beheld in the white chamber, the 
wretched king, disconsolate and wasted with grief on account of 
bis son. Approaching the king seated there, Sumantra making 
obeisance to him delivered the message entrusted to him by 
Shri Rama. 
The king heard it in silence, his mind agitated with pain 
and grief and fell unconscious to the earth. The queens, seeing 
the king fallen in a swoon, lifted him in their arms and covered 
him with tears. Kaushalya and Sumitra raising the fallen 
monarch from the ground addressed him, saying : " O Thou 
Fortunate One, why dost thou not answer the messenger of Rama 
who has accomplished his arduous task? O King, having 
exiled Rama, why art thou now full of shame ? Arise, there is 
no cause for this distress. O Lord, Queen Kaikeyi is not here, 
in fear of whom thou dost not dare address Sumantra. Speak 
without fear." 
Thus exhorting the king, Queen Kaushalya fell insensible, 
her throat choked on account of her grief. 
The ladies of the court and the other queens, perceiving 
Kaushalya lying on the ground lamenting, began to weep aloud. 
Then all the people of Ayodhya, old and young, hearing the 
wailing from the inner apartments of the palace, broke into 
lamentation, as on the day when Rama had left the city. 
2?7 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 58 
He delivers Skri Rama*s message to the king 
The king, recovering consciousness after a while, summoned 
the royal charioteer and turned his gaze upon him. Sumantra 
reverently approached the aged monarch who was grieving and 
restless, and sighing heavily like a newly-captured elephant. 
Then the afflicted sovereign spoke to Sumantra who was most 
miserable, his body covered with dust, his eyes suffused with 
tears, and said : " O Charioteer, that virtuous one, worthy of 
every comfort and happiness will now be seeking refuge under 
a tree. O ! What will be his food ? How will Rama, the son 
of King Dasaratha, who merits no suffering, who is worthy of 
resting on a royal couch, sleep as one orphaned, on the bare 
earth ? How can that prince, formerly accompanied by soldiers 
and elephants, and whose chariot was drawn by matchless steeds, 
now sleep in the lonely forest ? How will Rama and Sita be 
able to dwell in the forest abounding with pythons and other 
wild beasts ? O Sumantra, how can the tender and sorrow stricken Sita with the two princes, abandoning the chariot, 
walk barefooted in the forest ? O Charioteer, thou art fortunate 
in that thou hast seen the two princes wandering in the forest 
like the Ashwini Kumaras on the mountain Mandara. O 
Sumantra, when they entered the forest, what did Rama say ? 
What did Lakshmana say ? What did Sita say ? O Charioteer, 
tell me fully of Rama's dwelling, his sleeping and his eating, 
thus shall I live a Httle longer, like King Yayati of old, on hearing 
the words of the sadhus." 
Thus questioned by his royal master, Sumantra, his throat 
choked, his speech broken by sobs, replied : ** 0 Great King, 
Shri Rama, the Upholder of righteousness, reverently joining 
his palms and bowing his head, said : * On my command, offer 
salutations again and again to the most praiseworthy sovereign, 
renowned far and wide in the world as highly virtuous, and to 
all the men and women of the inner apartment, carry tidings 
of my welfare with salutations befitting their rank. Convey 
the news of my welfare to my mother Kaushalya, with my 
288 
AYODHYA KANDA 
deepest respect and admonish her not to neglect her duty. Let 
her practise dharma and tend the sacrificial pavilion. Say to 
her : ' O Goddess, honour the king, my father, as thou wouldst 
a God. Abandoning family pride and royal prerogative, 
serve my other mothers attentively. Kaikeyi is the king's 
favourite, do thou attend to her as to the king himself.* " 
" O King, Shri Rama has instructed Prince Bharata thus : 
' Let it be known to the prince, that I am well and instruct him 
to treat all his mothers with justice. Tell the illustrious Prince 
Bharata that, though regent, he must continue in obedience 
to his royal father. The king is far advanced in years, let not 
Prince Bharata proclaim himself king. Let him obey the king 
and act as co-adjutor.' " " Shri Rama charged me with tears, 
saying : ' Let Bharata look upon my beloved mother as his 
own.' The mighty armed and highly illustrious Rama of lotus 
eyes addressing me thus, wept aloud. 
"Then Shri Lakshmana growing wrath and sighing heavily, 
said : ' What fault has this noble prince committed to be exiled ? 
Assuredly the king has agreed to the foolish desire of Queen 
Kaikeyi, granting her boons without considering if they were 
proper or improper, through which we are all involved in misery. 
If Rama has suffered exile to satisfy the stupidity of Queen 
Kaikeyi, then assuredly it is an evil act. Even if the gods 
decreed the exile of Rama, I see no reason for it. Acting with 
imperfect understanding the king regardless of consequences 
has banished Rama which will surely cause him untold suffering. 
I see no parental affection in the king ; to me Shri Ramachandra 
is brother, master, relative and father. The darling of the whole 
world, Shri Ramachandra, devoted to the good of all, has been 
banished, how can the people approve this act ? Having, in 
opposition to the will of the people, exiled Shri Ramachandra, 
who is virtuous and beloved, how can he claim to be a 
king? 
"The sagacious Janaki, O King, stood mute, her eyes fixed 
and vacant, like one possessed by a spirit That illustrious 
daughter of Janaka, unacquainted with suffering, wept with 
grief and was unable to speak. Seeing the countenance of her 
lord wet with tears, her mouth became parched, and gazing at 
me, she wept bitterly. Thus Shri Rama, his face drawn with 
289 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
grief, supported by Lakshmana, addressed me, seated in the 
royal chariot, while the ascetic Sita fixed her gaze on me in 
silence." 
chapter 59 
The king bewailing the absence of Rama is drowning in a sea 
of sorrow 
Sumantra said : " O King^when Shri^Rama entered the forest, 
I returned and the weary horses halting, stood still, showing 
signs of distress. Offering obeisance to the two princes, I 
mounted the chariot and restraining my grief, went forward, 
remaining a few days with Guha, in the hope that Shri Rama 
might call me again and take me with him. 
" O King, turning homewards, I beheld the very trees filled 
with distress, their tender shoots, buds and flowers being 
withered ! The water in the pools and rivers was slowly ebbing 
away, the leaves in the woods were falling and the beasts were 
motionless, the restless elephants no longer wandered here and 
there. Afflicted by Rama's separation, the forest had become 
silent. O King, the waters in the ponds had grown turbid and 
the lotuses had submerged themselves, being unable to bear the 
severance from Rama. The fishes and water fowl had deserted 
their accustomed haunts and the aquatic plants and those that 
grew on land no longer gave forth their fragrant scents, while 
their fruits were devoid of taste. Gardens were bereft of beauty 
and birds sat motionless in the woods. 
" Entering Ayodhya, none appeared to be happy and the 
citizens beholding the royal chariot without Rama were perpetu ally sighing. O Lord, seeing, from a distance, the chariot 
returning without Rama, all were plunged in grief. The women 
of the city, from their windows, balconies and roofs, seeing the 
chariot without Rama, broke into lamentation. With tears falling 
from their unpainted eyes, full of distress, they withdrew their 
gaze from all. To-day, I am unable to distinguish friend or foe 
290 
AYODHYA KANDA 
owing to grief. All men together with elephants and horses, 
join in the suffering and mourning, all are afflicted in Rama's 
separation ! The city of Ayodhya, neglected and wretched, 
resembles Queen Kaushalya bereft of her son ! " 
Hearing these words, the king became agitated and in trembl ing accents addressed the charioteer : " O Sumantra, deeply 
penitent am I, that without deliberating with my able counsellors 
and elders, I granted the boons to the evil-minded Kaikeyi, 
under the sway of Manthara. This unpremeditated act was 
performed by me, inspired by my desire for Kaikeyi, without 
consultation with my friends and ministers. O Sumantra, this 
great calamity is the result of fate and will destroy the House 
of Ikshwaku. O Charioteer ! If I have ever done any good 
to thee, then take me to Shri Ramachandra soon ; my life is 
fast ebbing from my body, or do thou go to the forest and cause 
Rama to return, if he be still obedient to me. If that Mighty 
One be gone far from here, then take me in the chariot and 
drive there speedily ; I desire to look on him but once more. 
Where is Rama, the elder brother of Lakshmana, whose teeth 
resemble the water lilies and who is a mighty warrior ? If I am to 
live, I must see that virtuous one. If I do not behold Rama with 
reddened eyes, wearing beautiful earrings, set with jewels, I shall 
assuredly perish. O ! What can exceed my pain, that, at the 
moment of death, I am unable to see Rama, the hero of the 
House of Ikshwaku ? O Rama, O Lakshmana, O Patient Sita, 
you do not know that I am dying in bitter anguish." 
The king, his mind drowned in the sea of sorrow, cried : 
" O Kaushalya, that ocean of misery caused by Rama's separation 
is fathomless, severance from Sita are its shores, deep sighs 
are the whirlpools rendered turbid by my tears, the stretching 
of the arms are its restless motion, lamentations are the sound 
of its thunder, dishevelled hair are the weeds, the words of 
Manthara are the crocodiles and Kaikeyi is the tire in its depths, 
the unscaleable cliffs are the boons which sent Rama to the forest. 
Without Rama, I am sinking in this bottomless sea, living, I am 
unable to cross over it. I desire to see Rama and Lakshmana 
this day, but alas 1 I am unable to obtain my desire, as a result 
of some great sin formerly committed by me." 
Thus complaining, the king fell senseless on the couch. The 
391 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
monarch, bewailing the absence of Rama, swooned away. Hear ing the king's words, the mother of Rama, Queen Kaushalya, 
was seized with fear. 
CHAPTER 60 
The charioteer attempts to console Queen Kaushalya 
Queen Kaushalya, lying trembling on the ground like one dead 
or possessed by an evil spirit, now said to the charioteer : " O 
Sumantra, take me to the place where Rama, Lakshmana and 
Janaki dwell ! Life without them, even for a moment, is vain. 
Speedily return there in thy chariot, either I must follow them or 
enter the region of death." 
Shri Sumantra, weeping and distressed, respectfully sought 
to console the Queen, saying : " O Lady, abandon disquiet, 
infatuation and anxiety born of grief! Shri Rama will live 
happily in the forest ! Prince Lakshmana, self-subdued, 
serving Rama and living in accordance with virtue will fashion 
for himself an auspicious future. In the solitary forest, Shri 
Sita, her mind wholly centered on Rama in devotion, will live 
without fear, as in her own home. I see no lack of courage 
in Princess Sita, it would appear that she was born to reside 
in a strange land. As in former days, she enjoyed the parks 
and gardens, so does she now enjoy the uninhabited forest. Sita, 
whose countenance resembles the full moon, her mind absorbed 
in Rama, depending on him, sports in the forest ; with her 
heart and mind centred on him, she would hold this great capital 
no better than a wilderness without Rama. Walking in the 
forest, seeing the_ villages, rivers, towns and various kinds of 
trees, she enquires of Rama concerning their history and origin. 
To her, the forest is a pleasure garden in the neighbourhood 
of Ayodhya. This I remember of Sita, but what she said of 
Kaikeyi now slips my mind." 
Sumantra, carefully withholding the reference to Kaikeyi 
which had escaped from him through inadvertence and in order 
aoa 
AYODHYA KANDA 
to propitiate Queen Kaushalya, addressed her further, saying : 
" The lustre of the face of Janata is not marred by the fatigue' 
of the journey or the winds or through fear of dangerous beasts 
or through the heat of the sun. The countenance of the 
Princess, resembling the full moon is not impaired by residence 
in the forest. Her feet, no longer painted with vermilion, 
appear as fresh as lotuses. 
The princess ever exceedingly devoted to Rama, has not put 
off her ornaments, but with her tinkling anklets trips happily 
along, causing the very swans to envy her. Depending on the 
power of Shri Rama, she suffers no fear at the sight of a lion 
or tiger in the forest. O Lady, there is no cause for grief 
for these three or for the king or thyself. The self-imposed exile 
of Shri Rama, in obedience to his father's command, will remain 
a subject for veneration to the whole world, as long as the sun 
and moon abide. Having banished sorrow, Shri Rama pursuing 
the path trodden by the sages, living on fruits and berries, 
fulfils the behest of his sire." 
Though consoled by the charioteer, Queen Kaushalya, torn 
with grief, in the separation from her son, cried out : " O My 
Darling, O My Son, O Rama," and continued to weep. 
chapter 6 x 
Queen Kaushalya reproaches the fang 
The virtuous Rama, the upholder of dharma, having departed, 
Queen Kaushalya weeping bitterly, addressed her royal consort : 
" O King, Thy fair name is known throughout the three worlds ; 
thou art esteemed compassionate, charitable and of gentle speech. 
Yet, O Great One, tell me, how will thy two sons, brought up 
in ease together with Sita, be able to endure the forest life ? 
How will the young and tender Sita, worthy of happiness, 
endure heat and cold? How will that large-eyed princess, 
who lived on dishes prepared by skilful cooks, sustain life 
on the wild lentils of the forest ? How will she, accustomed 
293 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
to the sweet strains of music, be able to bear the roaring of 
man-eating lions ? How will the two mighty princes, whose 
arms resemble the rainbow,1 sleep on the ground, pillowing 
their heads on their arms. O When will I again behold the 
lotus face of Rama, framed in beautiful locks, whose eyes are 
like the water-lily and whose breath is fragrant as the nymphoea ? 
Surely my heart must be as hard as a diamond that it does 
not break into a thousand pieces, bereft of Rama. 0 King, 
in banishing thy children, thou hast been merciless. Worthy 
of every comfort, they are now wandering aimlessly in the forest. 
Should Rama return, after fourteen years, will Prince Bharata 
restore the kingdom and the treasure to him ? If those inviting 
the pious and learned brahmins to the funeral sacrifice, first serve 
their poor and deserving relations and subsequently the brahmins 
these will not accept the food of that sacrifice, renouncing it 
like wine. The learned brahmins regard it as a mark of 
disrespect to be served even with that in which other brahmins 
have already participated, which is like a bull shorn of its horns, 
of lesser worth. O Master of thy People, will not Rama even 
thus disdain the kingdom enjoyed by his younger and un deserving brother? A lion will not eat the food killed by 
another, neither will Rama accept that which has already been 
enjoyed by others. As the libations, butter, kusha grass and 
pillars employed in the sacrifice, are not used again, so will Rama 
not accept a kingdom which resembles a sacrifice without soma.* 
Shri Rama will never suffer this indignity, as a lion will not 
suffer the twisting of its tail. Do not all fear Rama as he appears 
on the battlefield? He, himself, is righteous, indicating the 
path of virtue to others, never will he seize the kingdom by force ! 
Is not the mighty-armed Rama with his golden shafts, able to 
destroy all living beings and dry up the sea ? Yet to-day, that 
Rama, powerful as a lion, is rendered impotent at the king's 
command, as the spawn of fishes is devoured by their parents ? 
O King, hadst thou regarded the scriptures and the eternal laws, 
observed and inculcated by the learned sages, thy virtuous son 
had not been exiled by thee. O Lord, the first support of a 
woman is her husband, the second is her son, the third her 
1 Probably in their span. 
1 Soma — a sacred libation offered to the gods. 
294 
AYODHYA KANDA 
relatives, but a fourth she has not ! Thou hast ceased to regard 
me as thine, thou hast banished my son Rama, and I may not 
follow him and leave thee desolate. O Lord, thou hast destroyed 
me utterly ! O King, thou hast brought disaster on thy 
counsellors, the whole kingdom, the ministers and thyself, and 
I with my son and all the citizens of Ayodhya are utterly ruined." 
Hearing the bitter reproaches of his consort, the king, reflecting 
on the cause of this calamity, overwhelmed with grief, fell 
senseless, drowned in the sea of sorrow. 
CHAPTER 62 
The king is overcome with grief 
Filled with anguish on hearing the harsh words of Queen 
Kaushalya, the king began to reflect on what could be done. 
Regaining consciousness, he sighed heavily and began to ponder 
within himself. He then remembered how, formerly, he had 
slain a young ascetic inadvertently by a sound-directed arrow, 
in the forest. 
The monarch was now subject to a dual cause of grief, the 
recollection of his former evil deed and his banishment of Rama. 
Thus afflicted, with bowed head, the king addressed the queen 
in faltering tones : " O Kaushalya, ever compassionate to thine 
enemies, I entreat thee, with joined palms, not to look on me 
with hostility. O Lady, to the wife, the husband is a deity 
be he virtuous or worthless, this is the eternal law. I know 
thee to be wise and acquainted with what is proper and improper, 
it is not meet that thou shouldst utter these wounding words.** 
Hearing this plaintive speech, tears welled from the eyes of 
the queen like tailing rain and taking his hands in hers, she 
addressed the king, saying : " O Lord, do not grieve, be at peace, 
see, I lay my head at thy feet, do not entreat me, it is as death 
to me I I have spoken what ought not to be uttered, pardon 
my transgression 1 That woman is not nobly bred* who expects 
295 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
her lord to solicit her with humble words. O Sire, I am 
acquainted with a woman's duty and I know thee to be a lover 
of virtue. What I have said was uttered involuntarily through 
distress on account of my son. Grief destroys patience, grief 
destroys the understanding, there is nothing more destructive 
than grief! The blow of an unknown enemy may be endured 
but the distress arising from grief is not easily borne, even with 
resignation. This is only the fifth night since the exile of Rama 
but to me they are as five years. Sorrow has driven away 
every joy from my breast and because of Rama my pain increases, 
agitating my heart as the waters of a swifdy flowing river 
disturb the ocean." 
While the queen was yet speaking, the sun declined and the 
night fell. Consoled by the words of Queen Kaushalya, the 
king, wearied with grief, sank into slumber. 
chapter 63 
He recalls a former evil deed which is the cause of his 
present distress 
A full hour having passed, the king awoke and was overcome 
with distress. He began to ponder deeply, but his mind was 
clouded with grief and though equal to Indra, death threatened 
to seize him as Rahu1 seizes the sun. 
The sixth night after Rama's exile, the king again remembered 
his former evil deed and agitated by the recollection of his sin, 
he addressed the Queen Kaushalya : " O Kalyani, O Auspicious 
One, whatever man does, be it good or evil, he gathers the fruit 
thereof. He is deemed ignorant who does not consider the merit 
or demerit of his actions before performing them. O Queen, 
he, who, enjoying the red flowers of the palasa tree, cuts down 
the adjoining mango tree and yet desires to partake of mangoes, 
will not realize his expectation when the palasa bears fruit. He, 
1 Rahu — a mythical demon said to cause the eclipse of sun or moon. 
296 
AYODHYA KANDA 
who, heedless of the consequences, enters into action, will in 
the end repent like the man who waters the palasa tree. 
" O Lady, I have cut down the mango tree and watered the 
palasa tree, now, when the fruit is ripe, I too, having banished 
Rama, repent bitterly. O Kaushalya, in order to be esteemed 
as an archer, in my youth, I directed my arrows by sound alone, 
and a grievous deed was committed by me. I am the cause 
of this present distress. 0 Queen, as a child swallows poison 
in ignorance, so have I destroyed my happiness by this deed 
formerly committed in ignorance. As one beguiled by the 
beauty of the palasa flower, waters it in expectation of the sweet 
fruit (of the mango) so did I cultivate the fruit I now reap, 
by shooting at a sound. O Lady, in those days we were not 
united in marriage and I was heir-apparent. 
"At that time, the rainy season being near, the increase of desire 
having come, the sun drying up the earth, scorching the world 
with its rays, entered the southern path. Then the heat subsided 
and refreshing clouds covered the sky, delighting the peacocks, 
the frogs and the swallows. The birds drenched with the rain, 
passed the night in distress, tossed to and fro on the trees by 
the humid winds. The limpid water in the streams dark and turgid 
from deposits of the mountain soil, flowed onwards sluggishly. 
" In that delightful season, taking my bow and arrows in my 
chariot, I came to the bank of the river Sarayu, desiring to hunt. 
Taking my stand at a ford, where buffaloes, elephants and tigers 
came at night to drink, I heard the sound as of a pitcher being 
filled with water in the darkness. Seeing nought and deeming 
it to be the sound of an elephant, I took from my quiver an 
arrow dipped in the poison of a snake and discharged it whence 
the sound came. Having discharged the keen and poisoned 
shaft, I heard the voice of a youth crying out, and he, pierced 
in the side, fell exclaiming ' Who has shot an ascetic who 
has no enemy in the whole world ? Desirous of drawing water, 
I came here in the dead of night. What harm had I done 
to him who has smitten me ? Why should I, who live on 
fruits and roots in the forest, and have injured none by word 
or deed, be slain by weapons ? What gain is there in destroying 
one wearing bark and deerskin ? To whom have I done an 
injury ? Such an act is unlawful, as one who does not respect 
297 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
the couch of his Guru is considered an abandoned person, so 
he who has wrongfully smitten me, cannot be a virtuous man. 
I do not grieve for the loss of my own life, but for what will 
befall my parents, when I die ! To what condition will they 
be brought on my death, that aged pair so long supported by me ? 
My mother, my father and I have been killed by a single arrow ! 
By what foolish man have we all been slain ? ' 
" O Kaushalya, I, ever desirous of acquiring virtue and 
eschewing what was evil, hearing this sad complaint, became 
exceedingly distressed and the bow fell from my hands. The 
lament of the sage caused me the deepest affliction and over whelmed with grief I advanced to where he lay, wounded by 
my arrow. There I beheld him lying on the ground, his hair 
dishevelled, his body besmeared with blood and dust, the water 
flowing from his loshta1 which lay at some distance from him. 
Seeing me standing there dismayed, he fixed me with his gaze 
as if he would consume me, and said : ' O King, what harm 
have I, a dweller in the forest, done to thee, that thou hast 
wounded me while fetching water from the river for my aged 
parents ? Thou hast inflicted a mortal wound by thine arrow 
and have in this wise slain my mother and father also, who weak, 
aged and blind and the victims of exceeding thirst, await my 
return. Afflicted with thirst, they are watching for my return. 
Alas ! what fruit have I earned by the practice of penance 
and the hearing of the Veda and Puranas1 since my father does 
not know that I am lying mortally wounded here ? Yet if he 
knew, what could he do, since he is blind and a cripple ? As 
a tree cut down cannot support another, so my parents blind 
and crippled cannot assist me. O King, go speedily to my father 
and inform him of my plight. I fear lest he curse thee and 
consume thee as a fire burns up wood I O King, the path beheld 
by thee leads to my parents' hut. Do thou go there and 
propitiate them, O King, that they may not wax wrath and 
curse thee. O King, free my side from this shaft ; this arrow 
penetrating my body resembles a river that washes away the 
long and sandy bank.' 
1 Loshta — a small vessel of coconut or metal used for begging or ceremonial 
purposes. 
i Puranai — Legends, or ancient epic poems. 
298 
AYODHYA KANDA 
" O Lady, I reflected that as long as the arrow remained fixed 
he would not die, though suffering great pain, but should I 
extract it, he would certainly perish. The son of the muni, 
seeing me afflicted and reading my thoughts addressed me in 
great agony and said : * O King, though in anguish and confused, 
my body quivering with pain and about to die, yet I am able 
to control my distress and am at peace. Dismiss thy fears, 
OKing, though thy sin is grievous, thou hast not slain a brahmin.1 
O King, I am born of a shudra mother and a vaishya father.' 
"As he was speaking, his eyes rolling, his face blanched, 
struggling and quivering on the earth, I withdrew the arrow 
and he, looking up in agony, yielded up his breath. 
" O Queen, deeply afflicted, I beheld that treasury of truth, 
lamenting, his body bathed in sweat, in the act of giving up 
his life." 
CHAPTER 64 
Overborne by grief the king yields up his life 
The king, grieving over the separation from his son, continued 
to describe the infamous deed, the slaying of the young ascetic, 
to the queen and said : — 
" O Kaushalya, having unwittingly committed this impious 
deed, I, deeply distressed, reflected what could now be done 
and decided to seek out the parents and propitiate them. Taking 
the pitcher, filled with water, I bore it to the ascetic's hermitage 
and there beheld his mother and father, aged and feeble, seated 
together, like two birds bereft of their wings. Motionless, 
deprived by me of their support, they sat, conversing of their son 
and awaiting the water. My mind was clouded with grief and 
X was smitten with fear, but seeing the aged pair, my anguish 
was increased a thousandfold. 
" Hearing the sound of my steps, the father spoke : * O My 
1 A deadly sin, the five mortal sins being : the murder of a brahmin, the 
drinking of intoxicating liquor, theft, adultery with the wife of the spiritual 
preceptor or friendship with those guilty of the above. 
299 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Son, why hast thou delayed so long ? Give me water speedily, 
0 Child, why hast thou been diverting thyself in the water ? 
Come quickly into the hermitage, thy mother is exceedingly 
anxious. O My Son, if aught thy mother has done has displeased 
thee, it behoves thee to forget it. Thou art our only support 
who are blind and crippled; thou art our very eyes, our 
lives are dependent on thee, why dost thou not speak to us ? * 
" Beholding the muni, and as one sorely dismayed, I uttered 
inarticulate words, then by force of will, controlling my speech, 
1 related to him the whole misfortune. Slowly, I narrated to 
the sage the distressing fate that had befallen his son and said : 
' O Mahatma, I am not thy son, my name is Dasaratha and I 
am a kshatriya. A sinful act has been committed by me of 
which 1 now repent. O Lord, armed with bow and arrow I 
came to the bank of the Sarayu to hunt the elephant, tiger 
or lion, that might come there to drink. Hearing the sound 
of a pitcher being filled with water and supposing it to be an 
elephant, I discharged an arrow and coming to the bank of 
the river beheld an ascetic lying on the ground pierced to the 
heart by my weapon. O Lord, having mistaken thy son, who 
had gone to seek water, for an elephant, I slew him by an arrow 
discharged on hearing that sound. On his entreaty I extracted 
the arrow from his heart causing him pain and he left this life 
lamenting for his blind parents. Thy son was suddenly and 
unknowingly slain by me without design ; what was to happen, 
has been accomplished. Thou art a sage, now do what thou 
considerest proper.1 
" Hearing the tale of my evil deed from my own lips, the sage 
retrained from pronouncing a curse on me. His eyes suffused 
with tears and his heart distressed, he addressed me who 
supplicated him with joined palms, saying : * O King, if thou 
thyself had*st not confessed this evil deed to me, thy head had 
instantly split into a thousand pieces by my curse. O King, 
the killing of one dwelling in the forest by a kshatriya causes 
him to lose his status, even if he be Indra. If anyone knowingly 
attacks a sage or spiritual preceptor with a weapon, his head 
is severed into seven pieces. Thou livest still, since the deed 
was done by thee without design, else hadst thou and the whole 
House of Raghu perished. ' 
300 
AYODHYA KANDA 
" O Kaushalya, the sage said : * Take me to the place where 
the body of my son is lying, I wish to acquaint myself with 
his final state. Alas ! Under the decree of destiny he is lying 
lifeless on the earth, his body besmeared with blood, stripped 
of the deerskin formerly worn by him.* 
" 0 Kaushalya, taking the deeply distressed sage and his wife 
to that place, they, with their fingers touched the lifeless body 
of their son. Approaching the place, they embraced the dead 
body of their child, the father crying : ' O Child, thou art to-day 
not bidding us welcome, nor dost thou speak to me. Why art 
thou lying on the earth, art thou displeased ? O My Son, if 
thou art angry with me, regard thy virtuous mother. Why 
dost thou not embrace me and speak tender words to me? 
Now that half the night has gone, who will read the Scriptures 
and Puranas in gentle accents to me ? O My Son, who will 
perform our morning ablutions and after offering up his morning 
devotions, serve and console us ? Helpless and destitute, who will 
gather roots, berries and fruits for me in the forest, and feed me, 
like a beloved guest ? O My Son, how shall I nourish and 
support thy mother, blind, ascetic and devoted to her son? 
O My Child, stay, stay, do not yet enter the abode of Yama. 
To-morrow thy mother and I will accompany thee. Without thee 
we are distressed, helpless and bereft of support, we will accom pany thee to the abode of Yama. Beholding the Lord of Death, 
we shall say to him, "Forgive our transgressions of the past 
which have caused us to be separated from our son and let 
him yet be our support. Grant us this blessing, O Lord of 
Death, and make us free from fear. Thou art just and the 
renowned protector of thy realm ? O My Son, thou art innocent 
and hast been slain by a sinful man, therefore, by the power of 
truth, enter thou the abode of heroes. Go, my son to that high 
state attained by those who follow truth and suffer death at the 
hands of their foes, without retreating. Go to that high region 
attained by Sagara,1 Shivya,* Dilipa,3 Janamejaya,* Nahusha8 and 
1 Sagara — the king whose story has been told in a previous chapter. 
1 Shivya or Sivi — King of Usinara whose charity and devotion are extolled 
in the Mahabharata. 
* DUipa — Father of Bhagiratha who brought the Ganges to earth. 
4 Janamejaya — One of the great and virtuous kings of ancient days. 
* Nahusha— Father of King Yayati. q.v. 
301 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Dhundhumara.1 That state attained by those versed in the Veda 
and practising austerity, be thine. That state, O My Son, of 
those who attend the sacred fire, of those highly generous persons 
who make gifts of land in charity, may that state acquired 
by those who give thousands of cows in charity and serve 
their Guru single mindedly, or those courting death by fire 
in meditation, be thine. None born of thy family has ever 
descended to a lower state but he who has slain our son shall 
end in misery ".* 
" Thus for a long time wailing in distress, the aged parents 
began to offer ceremonial water for their dead son. The son 
of that sage by virtue of his meritorious deeds ascending to 
heaven in a celestial form, in the company of Indra addressed bis 
parents with consoling words, saying : * By virtue of my 
services to you, I have obtained this state, you, too, will soon 
join me here.' Thereafter, that self-controlled ascetic ascended 
to heaven in an aerial chariot. O Lady, that great sage with 
his wife performing the water ritual, said to me standing near 
with joined palms : * O King, now put an end to my life also, 
I shall feel no grief in dying. This was my only son and by 
slaying him thou hast rendered me childless. As he was slain 
by thee, I pronounce a curse on thee. Mayest thou suffer the 
the same grief that thou hast caused to me, through separation 
from thy son, ending in thy death. O King, having slain the 
sage unknowingly, the guilt of killing a brahmin will not be 
thine. As the dispenser of charity receives the merit of those 
gifts, so wilt thou suffer in the degree of the suffering thou hast 
caused me, putting an end to thy life.' 
" O Queen, having cursed me, they lamented for some time 
and then gathering wood, kindled a fire, and entering it, departed 
this life. O Lady, to-day recalling that evil deed, committed 
thoughtlessly in my youth, by discharging the arrow by sound, 
the fruit of my action has overtaken me, as illness follows the 
partaking of unwholesome food. O Noble Lady, the time of 
the fulfilment of the sage's curse has come." 
Having said this, the king weeping and overcome with fear 
on the approach of death, spoke again : " O Kaushalya, I am 
1 Dhundhumara— Slayer of the demon Dhundhu, a title of the King 
Kuvalayaiwa. 
302 
AYODHYA KANDA 
about to yield up my life through grief for my son, I am unable 
to sec thee, do thou draw near and touch me. Those about 
to enter the abode of death distinguish nought. If Rama could 
but touch me for an instant, or receive my wealth and the regency, 
I might yet live. O Auspicious Lady, I have not dealt 
justly with Rama, but what he has done to me is right. What 
thoughtful man would abandon even a sinful son ? But what 
son, sent into exile will not think ill of his father ? O Kaushalya, 
I no longer behold thee, my memory is also fading. O Queen, 
the messengers of death call on me to depart ; what affliction 
is greater than this, that at the hour of death I do not behold 
the virtuous Rama, the hero of truth ? The grief caused by 
the absence of my son, who never opposed my wishes, dries up 
my life as heat dries up water. They are not men, they are 
gods, who will look on that lovely countenance of lotus eyes and 
charming features after fourteen years ! Blessed are those who 
will behold the face of Rama resembling the full moon, returning 
to Ayodhya. Fortunate are they who will behold Rama in the 
capital like the planet Shukra,1 completing its course in the 
heavens. O Kaushalya, my heart is breaking, I have lost the 
sense of touch, taste and sound. When the mind expires, the 
senses are extinguished as the flame of a lamp subsides when 
the oil is consumed. O Grief, thou art destroying me and 
carrying away my life as a river bears away the banks by its 
force ! O Prince, O Mighty Hero, O Sole Remover of my pain, 
O Darling of Thy Sire, O My Master, My Son, where art thou ? 
O Kaushalya, O Virtuous Sumitra, I depart! O My Cruel 
Enemy Kaikeyi, destroyer of my family's felicity." 
Thus lamenting, the king died in the presence of Rama's 
mother and the Queen Sumitra. 
Overborne by the grief caused by the exile of his son, that 
generous and mighty king, at midnight, yielded up his life. 
1 Shukrm— The planet Venui. 
303 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 65 
The palace is fitted with the sound of distress 
The night having passed, at dawn, according to custom, the 
bards arrived at the palace of the long, the traditional singers, 
those versed in rhetoric and in the history of the dynasty, and 
skilled musicians acquainted with rhythm and melody, began to 
sing the praises of the king. The sound of their eulogies and 
their songs filled the whole palace. Others uttering tributes 
and clapping their hands recited the monarch's wonderful deeds. 
The birds in the trees near the palace and those confined in 
cages awoke and sang. Their notes mingled with the salutations 
of the brahmins, the music of the vinas, the chanting of the holy 
names of God and the praises of those describing the great deeds 
of the king. Eunuchs and servants stood near, ready to serve, 
as was their wont. Those who attended to the ablutions of 
the king, brought water scented with fragrant perfumes, in 
pitchers of gold. Charming and well-attired men and women 
came with oil, unguents, mirrors, combs, towels and other 
articles and all that was needed by the king was provided 
according to custom. Till sunrise, all awaited the king, then 
they addressed each other saying : " How is this, has his majesty 
not yet risen ? w Then the women, other than Kaushalya, who 
formerly attended on the king, began to waken their lord as was 
their usage. Having with affection and skill touched the body 
of the monarch, they found no sign of life in him. Then the 
women, knowing well the motion of the pulse and understanding 
the signs of sleep, began to tremble perceiving the king's 
condition. Fearing that the king no longer breathed, they shook 
like the narcal1 grass in the midst of a flowing stream, and slowly 
became aware that their sovereign had passed away. 
The Queens, Kaushalya and Sumitra, overcome with grief 
on account of the departure of their sons, lay as if dead. Suffering 
had rendered the chief queen pale and her body feeble. The 
two queens, their splendour dimmed by sorrow, resembled the 
stars hidden by clouds. 
1 Narcal gram — a specie* of reed. 
304 
AYODHYA KANDA 
Seeing the two queens lying insensible and the king dead, 
the women wept aloud in distress. 
At the loud wailing of the attendant women, like female 
elephants bereft of their leader, Kaushalya and Sumitra came 
to themselves. Touching the body of the king and finding it 
cold, they fell senseless, crying : " O, My Lord," " O, My 
Lord." Lying on the earth, covered with dust, Queen Kaushalya 
resembled a star fallen from the skies. 
The king being dead, the ladies of the inner apartments beheld 
the queen lying on the ground like a female naga.1 The other 
consorts of the king with Kaikeyi, overcome with grief, fell 
unconscious to the earth. 
The wailing of the women within, and those who now followed 
them, filled the whole place. The royal dwelling, bereft of joy 
and filled with the sound of distress, was thronged with afflicted 
relatives and friends mourning and weeping. The queens 
stricken with grief, lamenting piteously, like orphans cleaving 
to their departed parent, clasped the arms of the mighty monarch. 
CHAPTER 66 
The inhabitants of Ayodhya mourn for their lord 
Kaushalya placed the head of the dead king, resembling an 
extinguished fire or a waterless ocean or the sun without lustre, 
on her lap and oppressed with grief, thus addressed Kaikeyi : 
" O Kaikeyi, thy ambition is fulfilled, now rule without further 
opposition. Having abandoned the king, enjoy the kingdom 
with thy son, O Thou of Evil Conduct ! Rama having departed 
and the king also, I resemble a traveller on a dangerous and 
difficult path bereft of his companions. There is no further joy 
in life for me 1 Alas ! what woman bereft of her lord, her deity, 
desires to continue to live? Kaikeyi alone is such a one, 
having abandoned all virtue. The greedy disregard the con sequences of their acts, like a hungry man devouring poisonous 
1 Naga— one of the icrpeat race. 
305 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
food without considering its effects. Alas ! Kaikeyi has 
destroyed the dynasty of Raghu at the instigation of a hunch backed woman ! How bitterly will King Janaka mourn, on 
hearing that King Dasaratha, urged by Kaikeyi, has exiled Rama 
together with his consort. The lotus-eyed Rama, not knowing 
the king is dead, is unaware that I, to-day, am masterless and 
a widow ! The daughter of King Janaka, the wretched Sita, 
unworthy of affliction will suffer intensely in the forest. Hearing 
the fearful roar of lions and tigers, in the dark night, she will 
cling in terror to Rama. The aged Janaka, whose only child 
is Sita, will assuredly die of grief, when acquainted with the 
sufferings inflicted on his daughter ! I, to-day, in devotion to 
my lord, will enter the blazing fire embracing his body." 
Hearing these words, the chief minister, versed in the tradition, 
drew Queen Kaushalya away from the body of the king, and 
placing it in a vessel filled with oil, to preserve it, performed 
the requisite ceremonies. The counsellors acquainted with the 
time-honoured duties, were unwilling to cremate the body of 
the king in the absence of the prince. As the body was lowered 
into the oil-filled vessel, the women of the palace wept bitterly, 
exclaiming : "Alas, the king is dead." Lifting up their arms, 
shedding tears and wailing pitiably, they cried : " O King, 
having separated us from the sweet-speaking Rama, why hast 
thou, too, abandoned us ? How shall we live with the evil minded Kaikeyi, who has exiled Rama and slain her lord? 
Alas ! Shri Rama, the chief support of our life, has gone to 
the forest, relinquishing his royal portion. How can we live 
under the reproaches and tyranny of Kaikeyi in the absence of 
Rama and of thee ? Will not she who exiled Rama, the mighty 
Lakshmana and Sita and abandoned the king, abandon us also ? " 
Then the chief queens, the consorts of King Dasaratha, 
overwhelmed with sorrow, shedding tears, felt themselves bereft 
of all happiness. like the night without a moon or a lovely 
and youthful woman bereft of her lord, the city of Ayodhya 
appeared stricken. Filled with men and women weeping and 
lamenting, the city was unswept, its ways unadorned ! The 
great sovereign, having through grief at the separation from his 
son, given up his life, the queens wept lying on the ground, till 
the sun sank below the horizon and the dark night crept on. 
306 
AYODHYA KANDA 
The friends and relatives of the monarch taking counsel 
together being unwilling to cremate the body of the king, in 
the absence of his son, laid it, therefore, in a vessel of oil. 
The king being dead, the inhabitants of the city filled the 
streets and courts, mourning for their lord, causing Ayodhya 
to resemble the night bereft of stars. Men and women gathered 
together, inveighing against the mother of Bharata, Queer 
Kaikeyi. All were distraught and bereft of joy ! 
CHAPTER 67 
The elders recommend that a member of the house of Ikshwaku 
be appointed fang 
To the inhabitants of the city, lamenting and weeping, the night 
was as a high mountain, scaled with difficulty. The sun having 
risen, the brahmin advisers to the kingdom came together in 
the royal assembly, even those illustrious ones, Markandeya, 
Vamadeva, Kasyapa, Gautama, Katyayana and Javali. These 
renowned sages, together with the ministers, taking their seat 
in the presence of Vasishtha the excellent and chief priest, 
declared their mind, saying : " The past night has been like 
a hundred years to us. Afflicted, on account of his son's 
departure, the king has given up his life. The king is dead 
and Shri Rama has entered the forest, together with the mighty 
Lakshmana. The Princes Bharata and Shatrughna are in the 
the capital of the kingdom of their maternal grandfather. A 
member of the House of Ikshwaku must be appointed king 
lest the country fall into ruin. On a kingdom destitute of a 
ruler, clouds charged with lightning and thunder pour down 
rain and hail ! In a rulerless land, the peasants sow no grain ; 
fathers and sons oppose each other and wives no longer remain 
subject to their husbands ! In a rulerless land, there is no 
peace, thieves and brigands exercise their power; women, 
unfaithful to their consorts, leave their homes ! Where women 
lose their virtue, trust is also lost In a rulerless land, there 
307 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
are no assemblies, nor do the people visit pleasant parks and 
gardens or build temples and homes of rest. In such a land, the 
self-controlled brahmins offer no sacrifice nor do those of pious 
vows, assist them in the sacred rite. In a rulerless land, the 
brahmins do not receive their due share of the sacrificial fees ; 
neither do actors nor leaders of song or dance find joy in such 
a land. The holy festivals promoting the land's prosperity are 
no longer held, nor do those reciting the holy tradition give 
satisfaction to their hearers. In a rulerless land, virgins adorned 
with golden ornaments, do not frequent the flower gardens at 
close of day, nor do the devotees of pleasure, riding swift chariots 
in company with charming damsels, repair to the forest. In 
such a land, the wealthy are not protected, nor does the 
husbandman, the cowherd and the shepherd sleep at ease with 
open doors. In a rulerless land, great elephants of sixty years 
of age do not wander on the royal highways adorned with 
tinkling bells. The twanging of the archer's bow is no longer 
heard, nor do the merchants travelling the roads in security 
bring their goods to sell from distant lands. In a rulerless land, 
the self-controlled sage, fixing his mind, in contemplation, on 
his identity with the all-pervading spirit, receives no hospitality 
when night falls. Wealth is not unassailable, nor are man's 
needs supplied, the armies have no leaders, nor can they match 
the enemy in war. In a rulerless country, no man, gorgeously 
apparelled, riding in an excellent chariot, drawn by swift 
steeds, can go forth without fear ; nor can the learned disputant 
propound bis doctrines in the city or forest. In such a land, 
garlands and sweetmeats, alms or other gifts, are not offered 
by worshippers as a sacrifice, nor in the springtime, do the 
princes, like blossoming trees, adorned with sandalwood and 
ambergris, walk abroad. A kingdom without a sovereign is like 
a river without water, a forest without vegetation, or a cow 
without a keeper. As a chariot is known by its standard, as 
a fire is indicated by smoke, so the king, a light representing 
the kingdom, has been extinguished. No man loves bis own 
kind in a rulerless land, but each slays and devours the other. 
Atheists and materialists, exceeding the limits of their caste, 
assume dominion over others, there being no king to exercise 
control over them. As the eyes continuously point oat what 
308 
AYODHYA KANDA 
is dangerous to the body, promoting its welfare, so the king 
ever regards the advantage of bis people, promoting truth and 
ethical conduct. The king leads his people in the path of 
righteousness and guides them in integrity, he is the parent 
of bis subjects and the greatest of benefactors. In the path 
of duty he excels even Yama, Kuvera, Indra and Varuna. The 
king, discerning good and evil, protects his kingdom ; bereft 
of him, the country is enveloped in darkness. O Holy Vasishtha, 
while the king lived, we obeyed thy1 mandates as the sea keeps 
within its boundaries. O Great Brahmin, consider our words 
and the danger threatening this, our kingdom, and appoint 
someone as king if he be of the house of Ikshwaku." 
CHAPTER 68 
Messengers are sent to Prince Bharata 
Shri Vasishtha, having heard the pronouncement of the 
ministers and brahmins, said : " The king has bequeathed the 
kingdom to Bharata, who, with his brother abides happily in 
the house of his maternal uncle, therefore, dispatch swift 
messengers speedily, to bring back the two princes. This and 
naught else should be done." 
Then all said: " Be it so, O Lord." 
Vasishtha then said to Siddartha, Vijaya, Jayanta, Asoka and 
Nandana :a " Come hither and attend to what I command you 
to do : On swift steeds set out for the city of Rajagraha and, 
concealing all signs of grief, thus address Prince Bharata :' The 
holy priest Shri Vasishtha and his counsellors salute thee and 
inform thee that an urgent matter awaits thy attention in 
the capital \" 
" Have a care not to disclose to him the fall of the Raghu 
dynasty nor speak of Rama's exile or the king's death. Take 
with you silken robes and excellent gems for the King of Kaikeya 
and for Prince Bharata, and depart without delay." 
1 Shri Vasishtha — being the king's spiritual preceptor. 
* Ministers of the king. 
309 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
The messengers received the commands of Shri Vasishtha 
and taking provision for the journey went to their own houses. 
Then mounting swift horses, accustomed to prolonged travel, 
they started for the kingdom of Kaikeya. Having taken leave 
of the holy Guru, equipped with provisions, they departed in 
haste. Their course, along the bank of the Malini, lay south 
between the Uparathala mountain and north of Pralamba. 
They crossed the sacred Ganges at Hastinapura and proceeded 
westward arriving in Panchala (the Punjab) by way of Kuru 
Jangula. On the way, they beheld many lakes filled with limpid 
water and translucent streams and passing speedily onwards, 
reached the river Sharadanda, full of pure water and frequented 
by many species of waterfowl. 
On the bank of that river grew the sacred tree Satyapayachan, 
to which the messengers made obeisance and then entered the 
city of Kalinga. Passing through the village of Abikala, they 
crossed the river Ikshumati issuing from the mountain Bodhi bhavana, a territory formerly belonging to the House of Ikshwaku. 
There the messengers drank the water of the river from the palms 
of their hands and encountered certain brahmins versed in the 
Veda. 
Traversing the land of Vahlika, they descried the mountain 
Sudamana which bore the marks of the Feet of Vishnu, and 
duly worshipped it. They beheld the rivers Vipasha and 
Shalmali and many pools, lakes and reservoirs. Proceeding 
further on their journey, according to the instructions of their 
master, they saw lions, tigers, elephants and various other beasts. 
After a long period, the horses became fatigued, but the 
messengers pressed on to the town of Giribraja in the kingdom 
of Kaikeya. For the sake of performing the will of their lord 
and to preserve the royal dynasty and the honour of the House 
of Dasaratha, without relaxing their pace, the messengers entered 
the city at nightfall. 
310 
AYODHYA KANDA 
CHAPTER 69 
Prince Bkarata's inauspicious dream 
On the night the messengers reached the city, Prince Bharata 
had a most inauspicious dream. Seeing that evil dream, the 
son of the emperor, when the night ended, was much distressed. 
His intimate friends, the companions of his own age, seeing 
him in distress, spoke pleasing words in the assembly and related 
humorous traditions to distract his mind. Some played on vinas 
for his entertainment, others danced, acted and narrated stories. 
Despite the endeavours of his amiable companions, Prince 
Bharata remained melancholy. At length, they addressed him, 
saying : " O Friend, we have tried in vain to entertain thee, 
why dost thou not smile ? " 
Bharata replied : " Hear the cause of my sadness. In a dream, 
I saw my father in faded apparel, his hair dishevelled, falling 
from a mountain peak into a pit of cow dung. There, I saw 
that great king, wallowing like a frog and drinking oil from 
the palms of his hands ; afterwards, I beheld him eating rice 
mixed with sesamum seed, his body besmeared with oil, he 
being immersed in it. Again, in that dream, I saw the sea 
dry up and the moon fall on the earth and the world plunged 
in darkness. The tusks of the royal elephants were broken 
in pieces and a blazing fire was suddenly extinguished. I saw 
the earth rent and the leaves of the trees wither and the 
mountains riven and emit smoke. I beheld the king on an 
iron seat, clad in black and women attired in black and yellow 
mocking him. That virtuous king, adorned with sandalwood 
paste, wearing garlands of red Sowers, seated in a chariot drawn 
by asses went southwards. I saw a female demon of monstrous 
shape clothed in red deriding the king. This fearful vision 
has been seen by me. Either myself or Rama or the king or 
Lakshmana will surely die. When, in a dream, one is seen 
riding in a chariot drawn by asses, the smoke of his funeral pyre 
will soon ascend. On this account, I am distraught, nought 
gives me joy, my throat is choked and my mind confused. 
I see no reason for fear, yet I am apprehensive. I cannot speak 
311 
THE RAMAYAKA OF VALMIKI 
or breathe, my body has lost its power, I am agitated and cannot 
control my distress. Never have I seen so threatening a dream ! 
Reflecting on it, I am perturbed, fear has taken possession of 
my heart and I know not if I shall ever again behold the king." 
CHAPTER 70 
The message is delivered; Bharata and Shatrughna leave 
the palace 
While Bharata was relating his dream, the messengers from 
Ayodhya, overcome with weariness, entered the city of Raja grahapura within the impassable moat. 
Having approached the King of Kaikeya and the heir-apparent, 
Prince Yudhajita, and being received by them with due hospital- 
ity, they addressed Prince Bharata saying : " The chief priest, 
Shri Vasishtha and his counsellors send their greetings ! Return 
speedily to Ayodhya, an urgent matter awaits thy attention there. 
O Great Prince, taking these precious robes and jewelled 
ornaments sent to thee, present them to thy maternal uncle." 
Shri Bharata, accepting the gifts offered them to his maternal 
uncle with great affection, then making provision for the 
messengers and entertaining them duly, he afterwards said to 
them : " O Messengers, is my father the king well ? Is the 
great Ramachandra well, and my brother Prince Lakshmana ? 
Is the Queen Kaushalya, the upholder of dharma, in good health ? 
She who is virtuous and a patron of brahmins, who is ever 
to be worshipped, who is wise and the chief queen ? Is the 
second of my father's queens, Sumitra the mother of Lakshmana 
and Shatrughna, well ? And my mother Kaikeyi, self-willed, 
given to anger, arrogant and accounting herself wise, is it well 
with her ? What message has she sent tome?" 
The messengers thus addressed by Prince Bharata, answered 
with respect : " O Lion among Men, those whose welfare is dear 
to thee, are well. Prosperity awaits thee, therefore, summon 
thy chariot" 
312 
AYODHYA KANDA 
Prince Bharata said : " I will seek permission of the king 
to depart and inform him I must go without delay.'* 
Thus, dismissing the messengers, Prince Bharata approached 
his grandfather and said : " Your Majesty, urged by the 
messengers, I wish to return to my father in haste, I will come 
again, when thou art pleased to call me." 
King Kaikeya smelling the head of the prince, addressed him 
in comfortable words, saying : " O Bharata, Kaikeyi is blessed 
in thee, a virtuous son! Carry my greetings to thy mother 
and father. Salute also the holy Sage Vasishtha, and the wise 
and pious brahmins in my name and greet the mighty warriors 
Rama and Lakshmana." 
King Kaikeya, then, bidding Bharata farewell, commending 
him, gave him great elephants and precious shawls, woollen 
cloths and deerskins. He gave him also with great venera tion, much wealth, two thousand necklaces, coral and gold 
ornaments and sixteen hundred excellent horses. He sent also 
wise and trustworthy counsellors to attend him. Then Prince 
Yudhajita gave Bharata two stately elephants named Iravata and 
Indrasihra and many mules to transport his gifts. His uncle 
gave him also certain tierce dogs, bred in the palace with large 
teeth equalling tigers in strength. 
Shri Bharata praised the gifts conferred on him and sought 
permission to leave without delay. His heart was heavy on 
account of his fearful dream and the urgency of the messengers. 
The prince came forth from the inner apartments of the palace 
and, surrounded by elephants and horses, stood on the royal 
highway. Entering the king's apartment, unchallenged, Shri 
Bharata bade farewell to all, then mounting his chariot with 
Prince Shatrughna, he started on his journey. Servants, horses, 
camels, bulls and mules followed the chariot of the prince. 
Escorted by the private counsellors of the king, together with 
the army, the patient and highly valiant Bharata together 
with Shatrughna left the palace fearlessly, as the perfected ones 
leave the region of Indra. 
313 
THE RAMAYAKA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 71 
Prince Bharata sees Ayodhya fitted with unhappy people 
That valiant and resplendent prince, turning eastward, came 
to the river Suddama, and passing over it, reached the broad 
Hladini and the Satali Sowing westward. Having crossed over 
the river at Hadhana, he reached Parvata and the stream in which 
all objects thrown are petrified, then proceeding further he 
forded the Shalyakartana river. Then the righteous and truth 
loving prince ascended the mountains and crossed the river 
Shilavaha near the forest Chitraratha, arriving at the confluence 
of the Ganges and Saraswati, and traversing the land of 
Viramatsya, entered the Bharunda forest. At length, reaching 
the swift and joy-inspiring Kulinga river, which descends from 
the mountains, he crossed the Yamuna and allowed his army 
to rest. There, the weary horses were refreshed and his 
followers bathed and drank, taking water with them for future 
use on the way. Thereafter, Prince Bharata entered the 
uninhabited forest on a great Bhadra elephant, speedily travers ing it. Finding they were unable to cross the Gunga at 
Unchudhana, they went to the place called Pragavata and 
crossing there passed over another river named Kutikoshtaka ; 
then with his army, he reached the village of Dharmavardhana. 
Resting for a while at Varutha, the son of Dasaratha went towards 
the east to the wood called Ujjihana which was filled with 
kedumbra1 trees. Arriving at the groves of sala2 and bhanduka3 
trees, Bharata, leaving his army to follow slowly, went forward 
with haste, halting at the village of Sarvatirtha. Then crossing 
the river Uttamika, he passed over several other streams with 
the help of mountain ponies. At Hastiprastaka, he crossed the 
river Kutika and at Lohitya, the Sukatavati. Arriving at the 
forest of Sahavana, having crossed the Sthanumati near Eksala, 
he traversed the Gaumati at Vinata. His horses being greatly 
fatigued by the journey, the prince halted the night at Salawan 
and at dawn beheld Ayodhya. 
1 Kedumbra — a kind of acacia. 
1 Sala tree — sal tree, Shorea robusta. 
* Bhanduka — Calosanthes indica. 
3'4 
, AYODHYA KANDA 
Having spent seven nights on the way, seeing Ayodhya from 
a distance, the prince said to his charioteer : " O Charioteer, 
this would appear to be the renowned and taintless city of 
Ayodhya abounding in green lawns, but at a distance it resembles 
a heap of yellow dust ; formerly the sound of the recitation of 
the Veda was heard, intoned by the brahmins, and the city was 
Frequented by royal sages. To-day, I do not hear the cheerful 
cries of men and women in pursuit of pleasure ! The woods 
at eventide were formerly filled with people, running here and 
there in sport, but to-day they are deserted and silent. O 
Charioteer, this is not like Ayodhya to me, but seems to be a 
wilderness. None of the nobly born are seen coming and going 
in chariots or riding on elephants and horses. The flower 
gardens were erstwhile filled with cheerful people and the 
orchards with those who made merry there ! These gardens, 
once abounding in flowers and trees, with pleasant groves and 
arbours, to-day seem to mourn. I no longer hear the cry of deer 
or the birds singing with joy. O Friend, why do the breezes, 
redolent with the scent of sandalwood and ambergris, not blow 
as formerly, over the city ? In the past, the sound of drums 
and the music of the Vina was heard by us, now all is silent ! 
I see portentous signs and evil omens, my mind is heavy on 
account of these forebodings. O Charioteer, without apparent 
cause my heart beats fast and painfully, my mind is clouded, 
and apprehension freezes my senses." 
Entering the capital by the northern gate, his horses being 
overcome with weariness, the guards, enquiring as to his welfare, 
sought to accompany him on his way. But Bharata, sick at 
heart, declined their company, though with due deference. 
He said : " O Charioteer, I behold the houses with their doors 
set open, bereft of splendour and emitting no fragrance of incense 
or sacrificial offering ! Filled with unhappy people and those 
who are fasting, the houses are destitute of all splendour. No 
garlands hang from any dwelling and the courtyards lie neglected 
and unswept. The temples, without attendant priests, have 
lost their former splendour, none worship the gods and the 
sacrificial pavilions are deserted. The shops where formerly 
flowers were sold and other merchandise, are neglected, and the 
merchants appear dispirited and anxious over the cessation of their 
3*5 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
trade. Birds in the sacred groves seem joyless and men and 
women in soiled attire, weeping and lamenting, wasted with grief, 
roam about the city." 
Speaking thus to the charioteer and seeing the city's distress, 
Prince Bharata drove towards the palace. Beholding the capital 
once gay as Indra's city, with the roads and courts deserted 
and the houses covered with dust, he was overcome with anguish. 
Struck by these painful portents formerly unknown to him, 
Bharata, with bowed head, his heart filled with dread, entered 
his father's palace. 
CHAPTER 72 
Queen Kaikeyi begins to relate what has occurred 
Not seeing his father in the palace, Bharata, desirous of 
beholding his mother, went to her apartment. Kaikeyi, seeing 
her son after a long absence, with a joyous heart, rose from 
her golden couch. Observing the apartment of his mother, 
divested of splendour, Bharata reverently touched her feet. 
She, having kissed the head of her son, embracing him again, 
seated him on her lap, and said : ** O Child ! How many days 
have passed since thou didst leave thy grandfather's abode ? 
Having journeyed in haste, I trust thou art not fatigued ? O 
Child, are thy grandfather and uncle well ? Tell me, O Dear 
One, hast thou been in health since thou hast visited that other 
country ? " 
Shri Bharata thus questioned, by his mother, related all that 
had happened. He said : " 0 Mother, seven days and seven 
nights have passed, since I left my grandfather's home. Both 
he and my uncle are well. The parting gifts of wealth and gems 
which the King of Kaikeya gave me, I have left on the way, 
to follow me, the beasts of burden being weary ! The 
messengers who conveyed the orders of the king, bade me return 
with all speed. Now, O Mother, answer what I would feign 
ask ? Why is this, thy golden couch, vacated by the king ? 
3J6 
AYODHYA KANDA 
'Why do the king's subjects appear wretched ? The king was 
wont to dwell principally in thy palace, where is he to-day ? 
I have come hither to enter his august presence ! Where is 
my father now, I have come to offer salutations to his feet ? 
Is he in the apartment of my chief mother, Queen Kaushalya ? " 
Kaikeyi, knowing all that had taken place but filled with 
ambition, answered Prince Bharata, as yet ignorant of the matter. 
Imparting the unpleasant news in honeyed accents, she said : 
" That fate, which inevitably overtakes all beings, has befallen 
that great soul, that renowned and mighty monarch the support 
of his people, thy sire ! " 
The guileless Prince Bharata, born of a great family, hearing 
these words, overwhelmed by grief, instantly fell to the ground 
and falling striking his hands on the earth, cried : "Alas ! I 
am undone ! " That resplendent prince, deeply moved on 
learning of the death of his father, began to lament, crying : 
" On this couch, my father appeared like the moon in autumn, 
to-day on account of his absence, this pleasant bed resembles 
the sky bereft of stars or the ocean without water ! " 
Heaving deep sighs, weeping bitterly and covering his face 
with a cloth, the prince continued to mourn. 
Queen Kaikeyi, seeing Bharata lying on the ground, over whelmed with sorrow, like the branch of a shala tree, severed 
by the blows of an axe, raised him up and said to her godlike son 
who resembled the moon, the sun or the elephant in splendour : 
" O Son of a King ! O Most Illustrious One ! Rise ! Rise ! 
Pious men like thee, do not thus yield to grief! O Wise One 1 
As the radiance of the sun "is fixed in that orb, so must thou 
who art devoted to charity, sacrifice and good conduct and who 
follow the injunctions of the Vedas, be calm ! " 
Prince Bharata, rolling on the earth, wept for a long time 
and then answered his mother sorrowfully, saying : " O Mother, 
thinking the king was undertaking a great sacrifice, having 
bestowed the throne on Shri Rama, I started for home with 
great joy, but now I see matters are otherwise and my mind 
is torn with anguish, since I no longer behold my ever 
magnanimous parent I O Mother, from what malady did the 
king suffer, that he was carried away in my absence ? How 
fortunate are my brothers, Shri Rama and Lakshmana, who 
3i7 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
have performed the monarch's obsequies ! If the great sovereign' 
had been aware of my return, would he not have bent his head 
and embraced me ? Alas ! Where is that royal hand, the touch 
of which filled me with delight and which cleansed my body 
from the dust ? O Mother, where is my sagacious brother Rama, 
whose servant I am and who resembles my father ? Tell me 
quickly where he may be found? Since my virtuous and 
enlightened brother has now become as a rather to me, I desire 
to take refuge at his feet, he alone is my sole support ! O 
Mother, what commands concerning me did the righteous and 
learned king, the ever-tnithful monarch of firm vows, give ? 
I desire to hear the last words of the great sovereign ? " 
Thus questioned, Queen Kaikeyi openly answered, saying : 
" The king, at the time of death, did not speak thy name 
but cried ' O Rama, O Sita, O Lakshmana ' and thus gave up his 
life ! Thy father, bound by the ties of fate and duty, like a 
mighty elephant, caught in ambush, uttered these words at the 
end : ' Those who see Rama, Sita and Lakshmana, returning 
from the forest, will attain their desire V 
As Kaikeyi revealed this unpleasant intelligence, the prince 
grew yet more distracted and enquired of his mother : *' O 
Mother, where is the virtuous Rama, where is he now with Sita 
and his brother Lakshmana ? " 
Thus questioned, the queen began to relate what had occurred, 
supposing the news of the unpleasing event would be welcome 
to her son. 
She said : " O Child, that prince, clothed in robes of bark, 
has entered the great Dandaka forest with Sita and Lakshmana." 
Hearing from his mother that Rama had entered the forest, 
Prince Bharata was alarmed, filled with misgivings and concerned 
for the honour of his House. He said : '* O Mother, how is 
this ? Has Shri Rama, without reason, slain any, either rich 
or poor ? Or has he looked on the wife of another with desire ? 
For what reason has Rama, versed in the scriptures, been exiled 
to the forest ? " 
Then the mother of Bharata, imbued with feminine qualities, 
capricious and calculating, began to relate the whole matter. 
Hearing her son's words, Kaikeyi, gratified, vainly imagining 
herself wise, said : " My Son, neither has Rama robbed a 
318 
AYODHYA KANDA 
brahmin of his wealth, nor has he slain any, rich or poor, 
without reason, neither has Rama looked on another's wife 
with desire ! My Son, having heard that he was to be proclaimed 
regent, I requested thy father to banish Rama and bestow the 
kingdom on thee ! Thy sire, in order to honour the promise 
made to me, fulfilled my request. He sent Rama, together with 
Sita and Lakshmana to the forest. Then that mighty monarch, 
unable to endure the separation from his son, died. O Righteous 
Prince, now do thou rule the kingdom ! For thy sake, I have 
contrived all this ! My Son, do not grieve, do not afflict thyself, 
the kingdom and the capital, being now without a ruler, depend 
on thee for support. Therefore, seeking advice from Shri 
Vasishtha and the learned brahmins, perform the funeral rites 
of thy great sire and, without hesitation, accept the throne ! " 
chapter 73 
Prince Bharata reproaches his mother 
Hearing of the death of his father and the exile of his brothers, 
Prince Bharata, deeply afflicted, answered Queen Kaikeyi : 
" What will the throne avail me, since I am stricken by the death 
of my father and bereft of my brother, who was as a parent 
to me ? Thou hast destroyed the king, and banished Rama, 
causing him to become an ascetic ! Thou hast thus rubbed salt 
into the wounds which thou hast inflicted ! Thou hast entered 
this royal House for its extinction, like the night of death ! 
My father, unaware that thou wert an all-consuming fire, 
supported thee. O Sinful One, thou hast deprived the king 
of life ! O Thou Destroyer of the Family, overpowered with 
avarice, thou hast shattered the peace of the hearth. Through 
union with thee, my father, a lover of truth, has suffered untold 
misery and grief ! Wherefore hast thou slain my virtuous sire ? 
Wherefore hast thou exiled Rama ? Hard indeed were it to live 
with such a mother ! How will Kaushalya and Sumitra now 
endure life? My elder brother, Shri Ramachandra, ever 
devoted to his duty and to the service of his Guru, treated thee 
310 T 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
as his own mother. So also my elder mother, Queen Kaushalya, 
knowing what would befall, yet acted towards thee as a true 
sister, in a proper spirit. Thou hast sent her son to the forest 
in ascetic's garb and still thou dost not grieve ? What hast 
thou gained by sending that renowned hero, Rama, to the forest, 
Rama, who was unacquainted with suffering ? Wert thou 
ignorant of my great love for Raghava, that thou, possessed by 
avarice, committed this great sin, O Mother ? By what power 
can I rule, deprived of Lakshmana and that Lion among men, 
Shri Rama ? King Dasaratha ever depended on that mighty 
and valorous Rama, as the forest depends on Mount Meru ! 
How can I sustain the burden of the kingdom, without the 
support of Rama ? How should a calf sustain the load that taxes 
the strength of a full-grown bull ? Even if it were possible 
for me to rule through wisdom and sound policy, yet would I 
not allow thy evil intention in seeking the kingdom for thy son, 
to prevail ! I should have abandoned thee, O Mother, did I 
not know that Rama regards thee as his mother also ! O Thou 
Evil-minded One, thou hast brought disgrace on the dynasty 
of my ancestors ! How didst thou conceive such a purpose, 
bringing shame into our lives ? It is the immemorial custom 
of our House, that the eldest brother shall occupy the throne 
and the younger brothers obey him. Thou art not acquainted 
with the duty of a king nor dost thou know the rules of 
government. In the House of Ikshwaku, the succession of the 
eldest son is enjoined. To-day, thou hast cast into the dust 
the glory and integrity of the House of Ikshwaku, that was 
enriched by the noble conduct of its kings ! Thou, too, wert 
born of a renowned and royal House, how earnest thou to 
entertain this evil intention ? O Mother, let it be known to thee 
that I will never fulfil thy evil desires, come what may, since 
thou hast introduced that which is destructive of life into this 
royal House ! I shall now bring my sinless brother, Rama, 
back to the capital and thwart thee ! Not only will I cause Rama 
to return from the forest, but I will serve him with my whole 
heart!" 
Thus reproaching Kaikeyi, himself afflicted, with harsh words, 
Bharata spoke once more, roaring like a lion in the caves of 
the Mandara mountain. 
320 
AYODHYA KANDA 
CHAPTER 74 
He laments the death of his father and the exile of Shri Rama 
Shri Bharata denounced his mother in great anger, saying : — 
" O Cruel-hearted One, O Wicked Being, thou art without virtue, 
enter the forest, I am about to die ! Weep for me ; since thou 
hast deserted thy consort, do not mourn for him. Tell me, 
what harm had the king or the most virtuous Rama done 
to thee, that thou hast slain the one and exiled the other ? O 
Kaikeyi, the sin by which thou hast destroyed the dynasty 
is equal to the murder of a brahmin ! Do thou enter hell ! 
Thou hast no right to inhabit the region to which the king 
has gone ! Thy deed and guilt are infamous. In denouncing 
Rama, who is beloved of all the world, thou hast secured me 
a kingdom, but brought me ignominy. Thou art the cause 
of my father's death and the exile of Rama, and also of my 
dishonour. Thy heart is adamant, thou art not my mother 
but an enemy in the form of a mother ! O Slayer of thy 
husband, thou dost not merit that one should address thee ! 
O Defamer of the fair name of this dynasty, thou art the cause 
of distress to my mothers, Queen Kaushalya and Sumitra ! 
Thou hast forfeited the title of daughter to the great King 
Ashwapati ; thou art surety a demon born in that family to 
destroy my father's line ! Thou hast banished Rama to the 
forest, he, who ever delighted in virtue and thou hast deprived 
my illustrious father of his life ! It is I who must bear the 
weight of thine iniquity, who am fatherless, bereft of my two 
brothers and an object of universal loathing ! O Thou Sinner, 
O Traveller on the path of self-destruction, say what state shalt 
thou attain, who hast deprived the virtuous Kaushalya of her 
husband and her son ? O Evil One, didst thou not know that 
Shri Rama was the chief asylum of his relatives, the son of 
Kaushalya and a father to me ? All relatives are dear, but to 
a mother, the son is dearest, since he is born of the body and 
heart of the father. Hast thou forgotten this truth ? " 
In ancient times, the cow Kamadhenu, worshipped by the 
3« 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
gods, beholding two of her sons, weary with ploughing, swooned 
away. At that time, the King of the Celestials, Indra, was 
wandering on the earth and the fragrant tears of Kamadhenu 
fell upon him. Experiencing the sweet odour issuing from the 
body of the sacred cow, Indra realised her superior worth and 
startled, looked upward and beheld, in the sky, the afflicted 
Kamadhenu, weeping piteously. The Bearer of the Mace,1 
distressed on seeing the renowned Kamadhenu shedding tears, 
addressed her with humility and said : " O Benefactor of the 
World, why dost thou weep ? Is it the premonition of some 
future calamity which causes thee to lament thus ? " 
The wise Kamadhenu, patiendy answered : " O Devaraj, 
thou hast no cause for fear, I am afflicted on account of the 
suffering of two of my sons. See, how wretched they are, 
how wasted and oppressed by the sun's heat ! O Devaraj 1 
The ploughman has struck them cruelly ! Born of my body, 
I am filled with grief to see them yoked to the heavy plough ! 
Verily nothing is dearer to a mother than her son." 
Indra, perceiving that the cow mourned over the wretched 
state of two of her innumerable sons, recognised that to a mother 
nothing is dearer than a son ! 
" O Mother, Kamadhenu extends her blessings equally to all 
and has the power to fulfil the desires of others. If she, who 
is constantly producing thousands of offspring, filled with 
maternal love, mourns thus for two sons, how then, O Kaikeyi, 
will Kaushalya bear the exile of her only son ? Thou hast 
brought about the separation of Rama from his mother Kaushalya 
and for this thou shalt not know happiness in this or in the 
other world ! I shall perform the last rites for my sire and 
then, with my heart and soul serve my brother and carefully 
promote his honour. Having brought back Shri Rama to the 
capital, I, myself, shall inhabit the forest. O Thou, of evil 
intent, how shall I endure thine iniquity, when looked on by 
the people of the capital with sorrow-stricken gaze ? Now it 
befits thee to enter the fire or hang thyself in the Dandaka forest, 
death alone is thy desert ! Only when Rama returns and that 
Prince of Truth is by my side, shall I find peace and my purpose 
be accomplished ! " 
1 Indra was sometimes called the " Bearer of the Mace ". 
322 
AYODHYA KANDA 
Bharata, lamenting and breathing like a serpent, fell to the 
earth like an elephant tormented by the goad. His eyes red 
with anger, his dress loosened, his jewels cast aside, he fell 
like the banner of Indra, uprooted at the close of a ceremony. 
chapter 75 
He seeks to console Queen Kaushalya 
The valiant Bharata, regaining consciousness, his eyes suffused 
with tears, perceived his mother filled with distress. Seated 
in the midst of his counsellors, he poured forth reproaches 
on his mother saying : " It was never my desire to rule, nor 
did I consult my mother in this matter ; I was not acquainted 
with the king's intention to confer the crown on Rama, being 
far from the capital with Shatrughna. I knew nought of the 
exile of Shri Rama, Lakshmana and Sita, nor how it came to 
pass. My heart is filled with anguish." 
Kaushalya, hearing the sound of Bharata's weeping, said to 
Sumitra : " Bharata, the son of the cruel Kaikeyi, has come, 
I wish to see the prudent Bharata." 
The queen, pale and weak on account of her separation from 
Rama, advanced trembling to where Bharata was, while the 
prince with his brother Shatrughna started likewise for the 
apartment of the queen. The two brothers beheld the wretched 
queen proceeding with tottering footsteps and were filled with 
distress. Bowing down to Kaushalya, they wept bitterly, then 
the chief queen embraced Bharata sobbing with grief and said : 
" It was thy desire to rule and thy cruel mother has accomplished 
this matter without hindrance, but for what reason has this 
pitiless queen sent my son to the forest in ascetic's garb ? Let 
Queen Kaikeyi banish me also to that region where my illustrious 
and golden-complexioned Rama abides ! If not, I will go 
together with Sumitra to where Rama dwells, preceded by the 
sacrificial fire. O Bharata, do thou take me to where my son, 
that lion among men, in great affliction is practising asceticism, 
323 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Queen Kaikeyi has made thee sovereign of this country, replete 
with wealth, grain, horses, elephants and chariots." 
Hearing the bitter words of Queen Kaushalya, Bharata was 
pained as a man who suffers when his wound is probed by 
a lancet. Agitated and confused, he fell at the feet of the queen 
lamenting. Then growing composed, with joined palms, he 
addressed the sorrowing queen : " O Mother, thou knowest 
how great is my love for Rama and also that I am innocent 
in this matter. Why dost thou reproach me ? May he, who 
is the cause of the exile of Rama, forget the teachings of the 
Vedas and the holy tradition. May he, who has given his 
consent to the exile of Rama, become a slave of the lowest caste 
or incur the sin of killing a cow. May such a man be subject 
to the same punishment as one who withholds the wages of 
his labourers. May he who has consented to the banishment 
of the holy prince, bear the same guilt as one rebelling against 
a king, who protects his subjects as his own offspring ! May 
the guilt of a king taking the sixth part of the revenue of his 
people and yet failing to protect them, be his, who exiled Rama. 
" May the fruits of the sin incurred by one who, well-equipped 
with elephants, horses and chariots and all weapons, does not 
fight according to the law of righteousness, be his ! May he, 
who agreed to the exile of Rama, forget the teachings of Vedanta 
which ensure happiness, and all the secrets obtained from his 
spiritual preceptor by serving him ! May such a one not live 
to see the coronation of Prince Rama whose countenance equals 
the sun and moon in splendour. May that wretch incur the sin 
of one, who, partaking of milk and rice, does not make an 
offering to his ancestors and guests or to the gods. May he be 
guilty of not honouring his spiritual preceptor by offering 
salutations to him in a fitting manner. 
" May that wretch, who gave consent to the exile of Rama, 
bear the same guilt as one who strikes a cow, reviles his Guru 
or betrays his friends ! May he incur the guilt of one who 
forswears his trust. May he, who participated in the exile of 
Rama, reap the sin of one who does not do good to others. 
" May the wretch, who ordered the exile of Rama, bear the 
guilt of one, who, partaking of sweetmeats, fails to share them 
with his servants, women, children or those surrounding him, 
3*4 
AYODHYA KA;NDA 
or one who, living on excellent food, gives to his inferiors that 
which is raw and ill-cooked. May he, by whom Rama was 
sent into exile, die without marrying a woman of his own caste or 
producing offspring or performing the fire ritual ! May he not 
behold the offspring born of his spouse ! May his years be 
brief ! May he be slain in battle, retreating from a superior foe 
in fear, or may he be as one who slays a fleeing enemy. May he, 
like one dressed in rags, demented, carrying a skull in his hand, 
wander about begging from door to door ! May he who has 
conspired to send Rama to the forest be given over to wine, 
women and gambling and become an object of contempt on 
account of his concupiscence and anger. May he ever indulge 
in the practice of unrighteousness and forget his duty and 
distribute immense wealth in charity to the undeserving ! 
May the accumulated wealth and extensive possessions of the one 
who has furthered the exile of Rama, be stolen away by thieves. 
May the sin of him who sleeps at sunrise or sunset be his ! 
May the sin of him who is guilty of arson or looks with desire 
on the wife of his spiritual preceptor or who betrays his friend, 
be his, who has advocated the exile of Shri Rama ! May he, 
who acquiesced in the exile of Rama be deprived of the worship 
of his ancestors and parents as also of the funeral rites ! May 
such a one, even now, be driven from the society of good people 
and lose the renown and merit of companionship with the 
virtuous ! May his mind never be devoted to such deeds as 
are undertaken by the righteous ! May that man who sought 
to exile Rama, fail to obey his mother and ever be employed 
n evil deeds ! May he maintain a large family in extreme 
poverty ! May he, ever restless, be consumed with fever ! 
May he be guilty of that sin incurred by one, who fails to satisfy 
a miserable suppliant who looks to him for succour ! May he 
be deceitful, slanderous, base, depraved and ever walk in fear 
of authority ! May he incur the guilt of one who disregards 
his chaste and devoted wife, who approaches him in the season 
of her flowering ! May he be dull-witted and abandoning bis 
lawful spouse, may he live in sin with other women ! May 
the guilt of a brahmin who abandons his children, who are 
dying of hunger be his ! May he be like one who denies a 
reservoir or administers poison to another! May that man 
325 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
lose the power of his limbs, as he who seeks to impede the 
hospitality to be shown to a brahmin, by speaking ill of him ! 
May his be the sin of one who drinks the milk of the cow that 
possesses unweaned calves ! May he incur the sin of him, who, 
having water in his dwelling, turns the thirsty man from his 
door ! May he bear the guilt of him, who arbitrating between 
two learned disputants, grants victory to the one he favours ! " 
With these words, Prince Bharata, seeking to console Queen 
Kaushalya for the separation from her son, fell to the ground, 
overcome with distress. 
The queen then addressed him, who, distraught and afflicted, 
seeking to establish his innocence, had fallen to the earth, and 
said : " My Son, my pain is increased by the words thou hast 
uttered but fortunate it is that the hearts of Lakshmana and 
thyself are fixed in love of thy brother. Assuredly thou wilt 
enter the region attained by the blest" 
Then the queen, taking the mighty-armed prince in her lap, 
wept aloud. 
The prince whose heart was rent with grief also wept in an 
excess of sorrow. Caressed by the queen, lamenting wildly, 
lying on the earth and sighing heavily, he passed the night 
in this wise. 
chapter 76 
The prince commences the performance of the funeral rites 
Skri Vasishtha, renowned among the sages, beholding Shri 
Bharata overcome by grief, addressed him in sage words, 
saying : " O Illustrious Prince, may happiness be thine, restrain 
thy grief 1 The time has now come to perform the obsequies 
of the great king!" 
Bharata, lying on the earth, heard the commands of the holy 
sage, and rising, began to perform the funeral rites. 
The attendants now removed the body of the monarch from 
the vessel of oil and laid it on the earth. Though the body 
32« 
AYODHYA KANDA 
had assumed a yellow hue through being immersed in oil for 
many days, yet it appeared as if the king slept. 
They then laid the king on a couch set with gems and Bharata, 
overwhelmed with grief, began to lament. He said : " O 
Great King, I know not why, in mine absence, thou didst send 
Rama to the forest. Whither art thou gone, leaving me bereft 
of Rama, that Lion among men and the Doer of famous deeds ? 
0 Great Sovereign, who with a constant mind is able to preserve 
his mighty kingdom? Thou art dead and Shri Rama is 
banished. O Mighty Ruler, this earth is widowed and divested 
of all beauty without thee ! Without thee, the capital resembles 
a moonless night." 
Shri Vasishtha again addressed Shri Bharata, perceiving him 
still to be a prey to grief and said : " O Mighty-armed Prince 
this is no time for giving way to sorrow or procrastination, 
now perform the last rites for the king." 
Thus addressed, Shri Bharata with the aid of the brahmins 
and the spiritual preceptor of the monarch, inaugurated the 
funeral ceremonies. 
In the sacrificial hall, the priests performed the fire ritual. 
The servitors placed the body of the king on a litter and conveyed 
it thence, weeping and lamenting. Scattering golden coins, and 
silver flowers and laying cloths before the bier, they proceeded 
on their way, while before the palace, sandalwood, ambergris 
and incense were kindled. 
On the banks of the river Sarayu, a funeral pyre of devadaru,1 
sandal and other fragrant woods, was raised. Aromatic herbs 
were thrown on the pyre and the body of the king laid upon it. 
The sacrificing priests poured oblations on the funeral pile, 
to the end that the monarch should attain the beatific state, 
and intoned the traditional mantrams, whilst the brahmins, 
acquainted with the Sama Veda,3 sang the Sama hymns. 
The queens, carried in palanquins, attended by the royal 
and aged guards, approached the funeral pyre, weeping. Then 
they, overcome with grief, together with the priests circum ambulated the blazing body of the king. The piteous wailing 
of the stricken Queens and the cries of distress of innumerable 
1 Devadaru — -a species of pine. 
1 Sama Veda— the third Veda. 
327 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
women following them, resembled the call of the krauncha birds 
in the mating season. Then the queens, abandoning their 
vehicles, approached the bank of the river Sarayu and, together 
with Prince Bharata, the counsellors and ministers, offered 
libations of water ; thereafter, weeping bitterly, they returned 
to the capital, where for the period of ten days they slept on 
the bare earth. 
CHAPTER 77 
The ceremonies are continued 
On the eleventh day, Prince Bharata purified himself and on 
the twelfth day he performed the Sapindi1 ceremony, and 
distributed jewels, gold, silver, gorgeous apparel and other 
articles among the brahmins. 
He also gave in charity countless white goats and cows, male 
and female servants, chariots and horses. On the thirteenth 
day, the mighty-armed Bharata, overcome with grief, went to 
collect the ashes of the king and, standing near the funeral pyre, 
spoke in a voice choked with emotion. He said : " O Lord, 
my brother, Ramachandra, to whom thou hadst entrusted me, 
has entered the forest and thou, also, hast abandoned me, 
helpless and wretched as I am. O Father, where hast thou gone, 
abandoning Mother Kaushalya, whose son is now exiled ? " 
Seeing die white ashes of the king's bones and the body 
wholly consumed, Bharata burst into fresh lamentation, and 
weeping, fell on the earth. The people tried to raise the 
prince who was lying on the ground like the banner of Indra, 
its support broken.' The counsellors raised up Prince Bharata 
as the sages formerly lifted up King Yayati, who had fallen 
from heaven on the termination of the fruit of his merit. 
Perceiving Bharata, overcome with grief, Shatrughna, remember ing his sire, also fell senseless to the ground. 
1 Sapindi ceremony — the establishing of connection with kindred through 
obsequial offerings. 
1 An allusion to the Shakra-Dhwana ceremony, in which a banner is erected 
on a pillar or tree, in honour of Indra. 
328 
AYODHYA KANDA 
Being somewhat restored, they called to mind the excellent 
qualities of their illustrious father and Shatrughna cried : 
** The boons exacted by Manthara are the ocean inhabited by 
the crocodile Kaikeyi, in which we are submerged. O Father, 
where art thou gone, abandoning thy tender and beloved son 
Bharata ? Why hast thou abjured us, thou who wast wont to 
give us delicious food, fitting gifts, robes and ornaments ? Who 
will now confer these favours on us ? Why is the earth not 
riven, thus deprived of an illustrious and pious sovereign ? 
Alas ! My father has departed to heaven and Shri Rama has 
gone to the forest ! How can I continue to live ? Bereft of 
my rather and brother, I shall enter the fire. I shall not return 
to the capital, I shall go to Tapovana." 
The palace attendants hearing the prince grieving so bitterly, 
were afflicted and fell to the ground, tormented like bulls whose 
horns are broken. 
Then the excellent and wise Vasishtha, their father's chief priest 
raising Bharata up, addressed him, saying : " O Prince, thirteen 
days have passed since the cremation of thy illustrious father's 
body. Do not delay longer, but collect the bones that remain. 
Every man suffers the three pairs of opposites ; hunger and thirst, 
pleasure and pain, life and death. Do not permit thyself to 
grieve for that which cannot be avoided." 
Then the wise Sumantra raised up Shatrughna and consoling 
him explained the nature of birth and death that visits all beings. 
Standing erect, those two lions among men, their eyes red with 
much weeping, resembled the standards of Indra, bereft of glory 
by the effects of sun and rain. Then the counsellors approached 
the two princes and requested them to undertake the remaining 
ceremonies. 
329 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 78 
The hunchback, Manthara, incurs Prince Shatrughna' s displeasure 
As Bharata, still grieving, was considering how he should 
approach Shri Rama in the forest, Prince Shatrughna spoke : 
" O Brother, how is it that Shri Rama, the support of all beings 
in distress and who is powerful, has been banished to the forest 
with his consort ? -Even if Shri Rama were bewildered, why 
did the mighty and courageous Lakshmana not defend him 
and restrain his father? The king, falling under the sway 
of desire, forsook the precepts of justice, Prince Lakshmana 
who was acquainted with what was right, should have restrained 
the king from this sinful act" 
While Prince Shatrughna was conversing thus with Bharata, 
the hunchback Manthara, attired in costly garments, adorned 
with precious gems, appeared at the east door. Painted thickly 
with sandalwood paste, wearing a robe and ornaments befitting 
a queen, bestowed on her by Kaikeyi, her waist encircled by 
a jewelled girdle, her whole body covered with precious stones, 
she resembled a captive monkey. The guards seeing that 
wicked and deformed slave, seized her and said to Prince 
Shatrughna : " This is the sinful wretch who has caused the 
exile of Shri Rama and the death of the king ; deal with her 
according to thy pleasure." 
On hearing the words of the guards, the prince smarting 
with indignation, reflected on his duty and said to those in 
the palace : ** Let this woman, the cause of the grief of my 
brothers and the death of my father, suffer the consequence 
of her acts." 
Shatrughna then seized Manthara from amidst her companions 
with such violence that her shrieks filled the palace ! The 
women, perceiving Shatrughna so enraged, dealing thus with 
the hunchback, ran away in all directions. They reflected 
among themselves, saying : " The enraged prince will surely 
put an end to us all, let us therefore take refuge with the 
compassionate, liberal and illustrious Queen Kaushalya, she 
alone will protect us." 
330 
AYODHYA KANDA 
Prince Shatrughna, the conqueror of his foes, his eyes red 
with anger threw Manthara on the ground and forcibly dragged 
her hither and thither, while all her ornaments were scattered, 
causing the palace to look like the autumn sky, studded with 
stars ! Dragging Manthara in anger before Queen Kaikeyi, 
who sought to deliver her, the prince reproached his mother 
with bitter words. Pained by the harsh speech of Prince 
Shatrughna, the terrified Kaikeyi fled to Prince Bharata for 
protection. 
Perceiving Shatrughna overcome by anger, Bharata addressed 
him saying : " O Brother, women are not to be slain by any 
living being, therefore pardon her and set her free ! If women 
were subject to the law of retribution, and were it not that 
Rama would forsake me as a matricide, I would have slain this 
sinful woman long since ! If Shri Rama became acquainted 
with our treatment of this deformed woman, he would never 
converse more with us." 
Thus instructed by Prince Bharata, Shatrughna restrained 
his wrath and released Manthara, who fell at the feet of Queen 
Kaikeyi, panting and lamenting. Perceiving Manthara full of 
fear under Shatrughna's displeasure and trembling like an 
imprisoned krauncha bird, Kaikeyi gradually calmed her. 
chapter 79 
Prince Bharata decides to go to the forest and bring back 
his brother 
EARLY on the fourteenth day, the king's ministers being 
assembled, thus addressed Prince Bharata : " Our Venerable 
Sovereign, King Dasaratha, having sent his eldest son, Shri 
Rama and the mighty Prince Lakshmana, into exile, has, himself, 
joined the circle of the gods. Thou art to-day our Lord, O 
Mighty Prince. The kingdom is now rulerless and the king 
bequeathed it to thee, it is not improper for thee, therefore, to 
ascend the throne, nor will any censure thee on this Account. 
33* 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
0 Prince of the House of Raghu, all the articles for thy coronation 
are made ready ; thy relatives, counsellors and ministers and 
the citizens look to thee. O Great Prince, accept the kingdom 
of thy paternal ancestors and cause thyself to be installed and 
protect us all." 
The Speaker of Truth, the illustrious Bharata, hearing these 
excellent words, reverently circumambulating the articles 
designed for the coronation ceremony, replied to those who thus 
addressed him : " Hear, O My People, it is known to you that 
according to the tradition of our Royal House the throne 'is 
inherited by the eldest son of the deceased sovereign ; it is, 
therefore, improper for you to make this request to me. Shri 
Rama is my elder brother and, therefore, should be king. I 
shall enter the forest and reside there during fourteen years 
in his stead. Now order my whole army to hold itself in 
readiness, I will go to the forest and bring my brother back, 
taking with me all the articles necessary for his installation. 
Rama will there be proclaimed king ! I will restore him like 
the holy tire which is brought to the place of sacrifice. I will 
never suffer the ambitions of Queen Kaikeyi to be fulfilled. 
1 will enter the forest, hard to penetrate, and shall make Rama 
king. Let the rough and uneven roads at once be repaired by 
skilled artisans ; let them be followed by mechanics and 
labourers." 
The people were gratified to hear the auspicious words of 
the prince and replied : " O Prince, may the Goddess of 
Prosperity1 ever abide with thee ! Desirous of making Rama 
our king, thy words are timely." 
Then all present experienced great joy and shed tears of 
delight. The happy courtiers, ministers and servants spoke 
cheerfully, saying : " O Chief of Men, at thy command we are 
summoning the workmen to prepare the way." 
1 Shri Laluhmi, consort of Shri Vishnu. 
332 
AYODHYA KANDA 
CHAPTER 80 
A royal highway is constructed for the prince 
Now, commanded by Prince Bharata, water diviners, expert 
and industrious mechanics, builders of bridges, wheelwrights, 
men able to perform all kinds of work, woodcutters, artisans 
skilled in the sinking of wells, labourers, hewers of wood, cooks 
and those acquainted with the way, set forth. The multitude 
of people advancing, appeared astonishing, like the sea under 
the full moon. 
Those proficient in various ways, equipped with axes and 
other implements, advanced in groups, cutting through trees, 
shrubs, bushes and rocks, levelling them and hewing out a path ; 
planting trees where these were needed, they cut back the 
branches of others that obstructed the way. Strong men set 
fire to tree trunks and cleared the road, levelling the uneven 
places with clay and filling the ditches. Others bridged the 
small rivers and brooks and swept the road clear of pebbles 
and thorns, pulverizing the rocks that impeded the flow of water. 
They speedily built barriers to dam the small streams and 
deepened the ponds by digging in many places. They also 
sank wells where water was scarce, and built platforms on which 
men could rest. Lime was spread on the road, trees were 
planted where birds sang and the highway appeared as if adorned 
with banners. Sprinkled with the essence of sandalwood and 
decorated with flowering branches, it resembled the pathway 
of the Gods. 
Those skilled in building prepared dwellings on pleasant sites 
near fresh water and fruit trees. Camps were set up for the 
army in accordance with Prince Bharata's instructions and all 
that was needed was provided. 
Those acquainted with the auspicious planetary positions 
erected quarters for the illustrious Bharata. Bordered by deep 
moats with intersecting roads, these camps were as lofty as the 
blue mountain. 
Stately white temples were set up, and rows of houses, 
bordering the roads, were adorned with flags. 
333 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
The balconies on the buildings, elevated like dovecotes, 
resembled the abode of the gods, and the whole arena rivalled 
Indra's capital. 
The way prepared for Prince Bharata, extended to the banks 
of the Ganges in whose cool waters fishes glided, as it flowed 
between woods and forests, and that royal highway, erected by 
skilled artisans, appeared as beautiful as the night sky, adorned 
by moon and stars. 
CHAPTER 8 I 
Vasishtha summons the royal assembly 
Yet a little of the enchanting night still remained, when the 
bards began to praise the prince ; three hours before the sun 
rose, the great drums were struck with golden sticks, while 
conches were blown and the sound of countless musical instru- 
ments was heard. 
The music filling the heavens increased the grief of Prince 
Bharata, who commanded it to cease, saying : "I am not the 
king." Then addressing Prince Shatrughna, he said : " Hear, 
O Brother, how unfitting are the praises now sung at the instance 
of Queen Kaikeyi. She has done us a great wrong. The king 
has departed to the regions of the gods and left me desolate. 
The future and the kingdom trembling in uncertainty, resembles 
a ship without a pilot drifting on the ocean. My father is dead 
and my mother, abandoning the path of virtue, has sent Shri 
Rama into exile.'1 
The women of the palace, hearing the great prince lamenting, 
began to weep aloud pitifully. At this time, the great and 
illustrious Sage Vasishtha, versed in the science of government, 
appeared in the assembly hall, which was decorated with wrought 
gold, encrusted with gems. Attended by his followers, the 
spiritual preceptor of the royal dynasty, entered the council 
chamber, as Indra enters the celestial hall named Sudharma. 
Seated on a golden throne, which was covered with an excellent 
334 
AYODHYA KANDA 
carpet with the swastika design, Shri Vasishtha said to the 
messengers : " Go speedily and summon the learned brahmins, 
the counsellors, the warriors and the leaders of the army; 
matters of great importance await them ! Bring also the royal 
princes together with their secretaries and ministers, Yudhajita 
and Sumantra ! " 
A great tumult now arose from those invited, who approached 
in chariots and on horses and elephants. 
The counsellors seeing Prince Bharata drawing near, were 
gladdened by his sight as though King Dasaratha himself had 
entered the assembly. 
The presence of Bharata added to the splendour of the court 
so that it appeared as when Ring Dasaratha was present, or as 
the clear waters of the ocean are enhanced by whales, alligators, 
shells and golden sand. 
CHAPTER 82 
The chiefs of the army prepare for departure 
The wise Bharata beheld the royal assembly presided over 
by the great Vasishtha and other venerable sages, resembling 
the night made glorious by the full moon. IUumined by these 
excellent ones, who occupied their seats, attired in splendid 
apparel, the conclave was of incomparable brilliance. The 
assembly of learned men resembled the beauty of the full moon 
on a winter's night. 
The virtuous priest, Shri Vasishtha, beholding all the ministers 
and the chief counsellors, gently addressed Bharata, saying : 
** O Child, King Dasaratha, having practised virtue in his life, 
has bequeathed this rich and prosperous land to thee. Shri 
Ramachandra observing the vow of truth, in obedience to his 
father and in conformity with the duty incumbent on him, to 
vindicate his parents, has not failed to accomplish his father's 
command, as the moon does not abstain from shedding abroad 
its radiance. Now enjoy the possession of this peaceful kingdom 
335 « 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
given to thee by thy father and brother ! To please thy coun sellors, cause thyself to be installed. The kings of the north, 
south and west, the peers and titular sovereigns of the western 
boundary and the monarchs of many islands, will bring thee 
countless gems as offerings." 
Hearing the words of his spiritual preceptor, Prince Bharata 
was distressed, knowing well that according to the ancient tradi tion of his dynasty, the eldest son inherits the kingdom. Calling 
Rama to remembrance, Shri Bharata resolved to seek out bis 
elder brother. The throat of the youthful prince was choked and 
in tones resembling the cry of the swan, he plaintively reproached 
the venerable Guru for the impropriety of his command. 
Bharata said : " O Holy Lord, how can I usurp the legitimate 
possession of one, who, learned in the Vedas and sciences, 
acquired by dwelling as a servant in the house of his Guru, 
knows their meaning well and follows them in practice ? How 
can one, born of King Dasaratha, striving to fulfil the law of 
dharma, take possession of the kingdom of Rama ? Not only 
does the kingdom belong to Rama, but I also belong to him. 
O Holy One, may thy counsels accord with righteousness | 
King Dasaratha owned this kingdom as did King Dilipa and 
Nahusha before him, so should the virtuous Prince Rama, the 
eldest and most excellent son, inherit the kingdom ! 
" If, as instructed by thee, I accept it, it would be a great 
sin and worthy of an evil-doer, not in accordance with the 
way that leads to heaven and I should be adjudged the 
destroyer of the House of Ikshwaku. I abhor the wrong com mitted by my mother, and I offer salutations to Rama residing 
in the forest ; I will follow him, he alone is king and worthy of 
ruling the three worlds ! It were easy for him to administer 
this kingdom." 
All seated in the assembly, devoted to Rama, having listened 
to the righteous words of Bharata, shed tears of joy. Once 
again Shri Bharata spoke, saying : " If I fail to bring back 
Shri Rama then I will dwell there with him in the forest as 
Lakshmana has done. O Ye Wise Men, accompany me to the 
forest and with your good help, I will try every means to persuade 
him to return ; skilled excavators, engineers and carpenters 
have been sent forward by me to render the road passable." 
336 
AYODHYA KANDA 
The lover of his brother, Shri Bharata, turning to the royal 
counsellors, addressed the wise Sumantra seated near them and 
said : " Go speedily and summon the army in my name to 
accompany me to the forest and bring the leaders here." 
Sumantra gladly carried out the commands of Prince Bharata. 
The military commanders were filled with joy at the order of 
Prince Bharata to proceed with the army to recall Shri Rama. 
In every home, wives joyfully urged their husbands to go with 
all speed and bring back Shri Rama. 
The leaders of the army riding their swift horses or in bullock 
carts and chariots gave the order to march. His preceptor the 
Guru Vasishtha being near, Shri Bharata said to Sumantra who 
was at his side, "Speedily prepare my chariot". Sumantra 
replied with reverence " Be it so " and highly pleased brought 
the chariot to which excellent horses were yoked. The Prince, 
filled with fortitude, illustrious, of fixed vows and a hero of 
the region of truth, resolving to recall Shri Rama from the forest, 
addressed Sumantra saying : " O Sumantra, mobilise the army 
and order my friends and the chiefs of the people to be prepared. 
I desire to recall Rama for the good of the world." 
As instructed by the great prince, Sumantra speedily issued 
the command to the chiefs of the army and the friends of Bharata, 
fully explaining its purpose. In every dwelling the brahmins, 
the warriors, the merchants and the labourers brought together 
camels, chariots, mules, elephants and excellent horses. 
chapter 83 
The whole army reaches the river Ganges 
Early in the morning, the prince rose and mounting an excellent 
chariot, set out in haste, desirous of seeing Rama. Shri 
Bharata's chariot was preceded by ministers on horseback and 
priests in coaches and shone like the vehicle of the sun. Nine 
thousand richly bedecked elephants and sixty thousand carts 
337 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
with archers, together with a hundred thousand troops, accom panied the self-controlled prince, the devotee of truth. Kaikeyi, 
Sumitra and the renowned Kaushalya riding in resplendent 
chariots, went forward to bring Rama home. The multitude 
of the twice bom proceeding from the capital, conversed solely 
of Shri Ramachandra and listened only to that which related 
to him. They said : " When shall we behold Shri Rama, that 
cloud-complexioned, mighty armed one, of fixed purpose ; the 
destroyer of the grief of the world ? As the rising sun ends 
the darkness of the earth, so by the mere beholding of Shri Rama 
will our grief disappear." 
Conversing thus of Rama and embracing each other, the 
citizens went forward, filled with gladness. 
The foremost merchants of Ayodhya who had received 
permission from Bharata to accompany him, also those who 
had not been so favoured and others, went forward happily 
to meet Rama. Skilful engravers, potters, weavers and workers 
in gems, those who made fans of peacocks' feathers, woodcutters, 
plasterers, workers in glass and ivory, masons and perfumers, 
famous goldsmiths, makers of woollen cloth, washermen, 
masseurs, appliers of unguents, physicians and those who 
fumigated the dwellings with incense, also retailers of wine 
were present. Fullers, tailors, chiefs of villages, cowherds, 
dancing men and women, fishermen, and countless Vedic 
scholars of subdued mind, devoted to Rama, followed Prince 
Bharata in carts drawn by bullocks. All apparelled in pure 
raiment, their bodies anointed with red sandalwood, mounted 
on vehicles of various kinds, followed in the wake of Prince 
Bharata. The leaders of the army joyfully accompanied the 
prince, now going forth to bring Prince Rama home. 
Mounted in chariots, palanquins, bullock carts or on horses 
and elephants, the people proceeded a considerable distance 
and reached the banks of the Ganges at Shrangaverapur, where 
the friend of Shri Rama, Guha, dwelt with his people, guarding 
his country with vigilance. Arriving at the banks of Shri Gunga, 
the haunt of the chakravaka1 bird, those following the prince 
halted. The eloquent Bharata, seeing the beautiful Ganges, 
reviewed his troops and said to his ministers : — 
1 Chakravaka bird — Brahmany duck. 
338 
AYODHYA KANDA 
" Let the whole army camp here to-night, to-morrow we will 
cross the river. Now I desire to offer a libation to the spirit 
of my father, the king ! " 
His counsellors replied, " Be it so, O Prince ", and caused 
the people to halt there, each according to his rank. The saintly 
Bharata alone in his tent, on the banks of the Ganges reflected 
anxiously how he might best bring Shri Rama home. 
chapter 84 
Guha3 chief of ike ferrymen, is filled with apprehension 
Observing the great army of Bharata encamped on the river 
bank, Guha was filled with apprehension, and said to his 
followers : " My Friends, this great army which is occupying 
the river banks, is not to be numbered even in imagination. 
Assuredly Prince Bharata has come here with evil intent, since 
the flag of his dynasty flies over his tent. Either he is come 
to bind and destroy me, or he is going to slay Rama who is 
exiled by his father, and helpless ! Perchance the son of Kaikeyi 
desires to slay Rama in order to gain complete possession of 
the kingdom. But Rama, the son of Dasaratha, is my Lord, 
my Supporter and my Friend, I command you, therefore, to don 
your armour and take up arms, lining the banks of the Ganges 
for the protection of Rama. Let my servants and the troops 
living on fruit, roots and flesh guard the ferry boats of the 
Ganges. Let five hundred boats be manned with their crews, 
and let each be guarded by youthful watermen well armed and 
accoutred. See that they are vigilant. If Prince Bharata be 
well disposed towards Rama, his army may cross the Ganges 
to-day." 
Thus, mobilising his troops and servants, Guha the chief 
of ferrymen, taking gifts of fish, flesh and honey, went to meet 
Prince Bharata. Seeing Guha approaching, the excellent 
Sumantra said to Bharata : " This Guha attended by a thousand 
kinsmen is the king of this place, he is a native of these parte 
339 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
and is fully acquainted with the forest, he is a friend of thy 
brother, Shri Rama. Therefore, O Prince, let him be admitted 
in audience to thee, he assuredly knows the place where Rama 
and Lakshmana dwell." 
Hearing the words of the sagacious Sumantra, Bharata said : 
" Go and tell Guha that I desire to meet him." 
The sanction of Prince Bharata being given, Guha with the 
chiefs of his people approached the prince and thus addressed 
him : " O Lord, consider this country as thine own domain ; 
not being acquainted with thine intention, I am unable to offer 
thee a fitting welcome. This inconsiderable kingdom is thine 
and we also are thine ! We entreat thee to abide in thy servant's 
house. I have brought roots, fruits and flesh both fresh and 
dried for thee and other products of the forest for thy use. 
It is my hope that thine army remain here to-night as my guests ; 
may we have occasion to serve thee, O Prince ; to-morrow thou 
canst go forward with thine army." 
CHAPTER 85 
He is filled with joy on hearing of Prince Bkarata's intention 
The wise Bharata listened to the words of the chief of ferrymen 
and revealed his purpose to him, stating his reasons thus : 
" O Friend of my elder brother, thy hospitality is great, since 
thou desirest to entertain so great an army as accompanies me." 
Prince Bharata then addressed Guha once more in gentle 
and well-chosen words, and said : " O Chief of the Nishadas, 
by what way shall I proceed to the hermitage of the Sage 
Bharadwaja? The valley of the Ganges being flooded is 
difficult to cross." 
Guha, acquainted with all the paths and inaccessible parts 
of the forest, replied with great humility : " 0 Illustrious Prince, 
have no anxiety ! These, my kinsmen, armed with bows and 
arrows, fully acquainted with the forest, shall accompany thee, 
and I also shall follow thee in person. But observing thy great 
340 
AYODHYA KANDA 
army, I am filled with apprehension. Art thou going to approach 
Rama, urged by some evil intent ? " 
Shri Bharata, whose heart was pure as the stainless heavens, 
answered him in sweet accents, saying : " O Guha ! May the 
time never come when I cause him distress. Do not look on 
me with fear O Friend j Rama, my elder brother, is to me 
equal to my father himself! O Guha, I go to bring back Shri 
Rama from the forest. Do not impute any evil motive to me ! 
O Friend, this is the truth and the truth alone." 
Guha was filled with joy on hearing the words of Prince 
Bharata and again addressed him saying : " O Bharata, blessed 
art thou. In the whole world, I see none equal to thee, since 
thou desirest to relinquish a great empire that has fallen to thee 
without any effort of thine own. Thy fame in the world will 
live forever, since thou, suffering distress, didst go forth to 
bring back Shri Rama." 
While Prince Bharata and Guha were thus conversing, the 
sun set and the night drew on. Gratified with the converse 
and hospitality of Guha, his army fully refreshed, Shri Bharata 
entered his tent to rest. But the prince, whose heart formerly 
had been unacquainted with grief and who was patient and free 
from sin, which is the chief cause of suffering, was yet overcome 
by pain on account of Rama. Sorrow for Raghava consumed him 
inwardly, as a fire consumes a withered and hollow tree in the 
forest. The perspiration caused by the fire of grief ran down 
bis body, as the snow flows from the Himalayan peaks melting 
under the heat of the sun. 
By the mountain, the peak of which was sorrow, the recollec tion of Rama the rocks, his sighs the mineral charged streams, 
his desolation the forest, and weariness the promontories, his 
deep anxiety the wild beasts, his restlessness the herbs, by 
this mountain of affliction was Shri Bharata overwhelmed. 
Assailed by unspeakable anguish, the prince sighed heavily 
and almost bereft of reason, unconscious of his body, like a bull 
driven from the herd, was deprived of all rest. 
Guha approaching with his friends and kinsmen, embracing 
Shri Bharata, gently began to reassure him, regarding his elder 
brother. 
34i 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 86 
Guha tells of Shri Rama's stay by the sacred river 
The dweller in that dense forest, Guha, began to console the 
virtuous and affectionate prince, whose love for the pious 
Lakshmana and Shri Ramachandra was unwavering, and said : 
" O Lord, when the valiant Lakshmana, well armed, was keeping 
watch over the then sleeping Rama, I said to him, ' O Friend, 
a soft couch is prepared for thee, sleep thereon at ease, O Prince 
of Raghu, those dwelling in the forest are accustomed to hardship 
but thou art worthy of comfort, we will keep guard over 
Shri Rama this night. O Prince, there is none in the world 
so dear to us as Rama. Be not anxious, we will keep watch 
over Shri Rama ; do thou rest. By the grace of Rama, I hope 
to acquire great renown and the limitless wealth of dharma 
in this world. Therefore, O Prince, I will protect my friend, 
Shri Rama who is reposing with Sita ! My kinsmen will keep 
watch ; nothing in the forest is unknown to me, who constantly 
traverse it ; I could challenge a great army with success, should 
it venture to attack Shri Rama ! " 
" O Lord, the illustrious Lakshmana, established in virtue, 
answered me saying : ' O Guha, when the virtuous Rama and 
Sita are resting on the naked earth, how should I occupy an 
easy couch ? How can any of the comforts of life or life itself 
be mine if Shri Rama does not also enjoy them ? O Guha, 
behold Shri Rama, capable of subduing the gods and demons, 
resting on a bed of grass. Through great austerity and 
penance was Shri Dasaratha blessed with a son, like unto himself. 
Assuredly, the king will not long survive the exile of Shri Rama, 
and the land will soon become widowed. The women will 
lament loudly and then grow silent. I fear lest my Father, 
Queen Kaushalya and my mother Sumitra will not survive. 
Perchance my mother will continue to live in expectation of the 
return of Shatrughna, but Kaushalya, the mother of that great 
hero will surely die ! The king desired to transfer the throne 
to Prince Bharata, but this ambition will not be realised by him. 
A great and honourable duty will be fulfilled in performing 
34a 
AYODHYA KANDA 
the funeral ceremonies for my sire. The capital of the king 
abounding with beautiful terraces and parks, pleasant highways 
and tall houses encrusted with gems, crowded with horses, 
elephants and chariots, resounding with music, furnished with 
pleasure grounds, where happy and healthy people gather, is 
blessed by those who walk therein. O Guha, shall we, returning 
with Rama, the fulfiUer of firm vows, when the fourteen years 
of exile are over, joyfully enter Ayodhya in his company ? " 
Guha said: "O Prince, thus keeping watch, the mighty 
Lakshmana, bearing his bow and arrows, passed the night. 
When the clear sun rose, the two princely brothers, on this 
selfsame bank of the sacred river caused their beautiful locks 
to be matted and were then conveyed by me, in safety, over 
the Ganges. 
The royal brothers, heroic, resplendent and the subduers of 
their enemies, their hair matted, attired in bark, armed with 
bow and quiver, departed with Sita, looking back at me, like 
mighty elephants.*' 
CHAPTER 87 
Horn Shri Rama spent his first night of exile 
Having heard the moving tale related by Guha, Prince Bharata 
began to reflect on Rama. That tender prince of powerful arms, 
whose shoulders resembled a lion's and whose eyes were like 
the lotus, who was patient, youthful and charming in appearance 
yet sad at heart, at length sank to the ground unconscious, 
like an elephant stricken to the heart by a goad. 
Prince Shatrughna ever in attendance on Bharata, deeply 
afflicted by his state, embracing his body, wept aloud. Then all 
the mothers of Prince Bharata, emaciated with fasting and sorrow 
for their deceased lord, surrounded him, lying unconscious on 
the earth. The pious Queen Kaushalya approaching, raised 
Bharata up and pressed him to her breast. The ascetic queen, 
the lover of her son, straining him to her bosom as if he were 
343 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
her own child, weeping, enquired of him, saying : " O My Son, 
art thou afflicted by pain ? The life of this royal family wholly 
depends on thee ! O Child, Shri Rama has gone to the forest 
with Lakshmana, I live only if I behold thy face. King 
Dasaratha being dead, thou alone art the protector of the people. 
O Child, hast thou heard aught against Lakshmana or my only 
son, who, with his wife is gone to the forest ? " 
The renowned Bharata returning to his normal consciousness, 
consoled the weeping Kaushalya and then addressed Guha : 
" O Guha, where did my brother pass the night here ? What 
did he eat, on what couch did he rest ? Where did Sita and 
Lakshmana dwell ? " 
Guha, the King of Nishadas, gladly related how he had 
entertained his gracious guest, Shri Rama. He said, " O 
Bharata, rice, other foods and fruit in abundance were placed 
by me, before Shri Rama. To please me, that hero of the realm 
of truth, Shri Ramachandra, accepted the gifts, but recollecting 
his duty as a kshatriya did not partake of them. He said : 
" O Friend, we are warriors and it is our duty to give all to 
others, not accepting any gift for ourselves." 
That night, the great-hearted Rama, having with Sita drunk 
the water brought by Shri Lakshmana, retired to rest, fasting. 
Shri Lakshmana finishing the water that was left over, all 
observed silence and performed the evening devotion with con centration. Thereafter the son of Sumitra brought kusha 
grass and spread it on the earth to serve as a couch for Rama. 
As Shri Rama and Sita rested there, Shri Lakshmana washed 
their feet in pure water and then moved to a distance to* mount 
guard over them. 
O Prince, here is that Ingudi tree, and here is the couch 
of grass on which Rama and Sita slept. That hero, Shri 
Lakshmana with his quiver filled with arrows, bound to his body, 
donning gloves made of goha-skin, drawing the string of his bow, 
paced round and round at a distance, guarding the royal pair. 
X also, O Prince, surrounded by my kinsmen, armed with 
an excellent bow, kept watch through the night, protecting 
Shri Ramachandra, who resembled Indra. 
' 344 
AYODHYA KANDA 
CHAPTER 88 
Prince Bharata sleeps on the same spot where Shri Rama 
had rested 
Shri Bharata with his counsellors reverently approached the 
Ingudi tree and looked with love on the grassy couch. He said 
to his mothers : " This grass was pressed by the royal frame 
of the illustrious Ramachandra, who passed the first night 
of exile in this place. It ill became the great and wise son 
of King Dasaratha to sleep on the bare earth ! How could 
Shri Rama, who ever reposed on a soft couch, sleep on the 
naked ground ? Shri Rama who dwelt in a seven-storied palace, 
the floors of which were studded with gold and silver flowers, 
overlaid with soft carpets of many a hue on which marvellous 
floral designs were woven, the whole fragrant with the perfume 
of sandalwood and ambergris, and which resembled the clouds ; 
where the cries of parrots and mainas were constantly heard 
and cool air flowed uninterruptedly through shafts ; where the 
walls inlaid with gold and silver resembled the Meru mountain : 
in such a palace, Shri Rama was accustomed to rest, awakened 
each morning by the sweet music of the royal musicians and 
the gentle tinkling of women's anklets, and duly praised by 
the bards, panegyrists and ministers, in verse and song. To-day, 
he sleeps on the naked earth and hears the cry of jackals and 
other wild beasts. This matter is past belief, it resembles a 
dream ! I consider nothing more powerful than the will of 
the Lord ; how otherwise should the son of King Dasaratha 
be seen sleeping on the earth ? How could the daughter of 
King Janaka, that beautiful princess, the beloved daughter-in law of King Dasaratha, sleep on the naked ground ? 
** O Mother, here is my brother's couch, on it he tossed, 
crushing the grass by the weight of bis limbs. It would seem 
that Shri Sita rested here also, wearing her ornaments, since 
I perceive particles of gold lying here and there. O Mother, 
see Sita's scarf became entangled here, for in this place I see 
threads of silk ! Whether it be hard or soft, the couch of her 
lord is sweet to a woman I See 1 The young and tender Sita, 
345 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
devoted to her husband, experienced no smart, resting here. 
Oh ! I am undone ! What a merciless wretch am I ! On 
my account, Shri Ramachandra and his spouse lay on this hard 
couch I Alas that Shri Rama, deprived of kingly felicity, 
though born of a royal line, dear to all and the cause of universal 
joy, whose complexion resembles the blue lotus, whose eyes 
are slightly red,1 charming to look upon, not meriting tribulation, 
should have to sleep on the naked earth. 
" Blessed and fortunate is Lakshmana, who followed his 
brother in the days of adversity ! Fruitful is the life of Princess 
Sita who, thus accompanied her lord to the forest. Wretched 
are we, bereft of Shri Rama ; nor are we certain that he will 
allow us to serve him. King Dasaratha, being dead, and Shri 
Rama having entered the forest, the earth appears to me like a 
boat without a pilot. None desires to usurp the place spiritually 
reserved for him, who dwells in the forest. To-day the capital 
is empty and unprotected, horses and elephants wander here 
and there unconfincd, there being none to control them ; the 
gates of the city are left open and unguarded ; the army is 
melancholy and indifferent to the defence of the capital! 
Ayodhya externally without protection and bereft of purpose, 
is in a sorry state. Even its enemies torn from it, as men 
turn away from poisoned food ! 
" From to-day, assuming an ascetic garb, I will sleep on the 
earth and live on fruit and roots. I shall live in the forest for 
the remainder of the term which Rama has to discharge, so 
that his vow may be fulfilled. My brother Shatrughna shall 
dwell with me in the forest, while Lakshmana returns with Rama 
to protect the capital ! The learned brahmins will install Shri 
Rama in Ayodhya ! I entreat the gods to fulfil the desire of 
my heart. If Rama, however, will not grant my request, I will 
remain in the forest as his servant, but how should he reject 
my appeal ? Is he not compassionate towards his devotees ? " 
1 This is said to be one of the marks of a divine Incarnation. 
34« 
AYODHYA KANDA 
CHAPTER 89 
The army crosses the holy river 
Bharata having slept on the same spot where Shri Rama had 
lately rested, and the night being over, called Shatrughna, and 
said to him : "Arise, O Brother, may good attend thee ! The 
day has dawned, sleep no more ! Please summon Guha, the 
chief of the Nishadas, so that he may convey our army across 
the river." 
Shatrughna answered : " O Noble One, I am awake. I was 
not able to sleep, for like thee I have been meditating on Shri 
Rama!" 
As these two, die chiefs of men, stood conversing together, 
Guha approaching, said with humility : " O Prince, didst thou 
rest at ease, on the river bank ? Did any disturbance visit thee 
or thine army ? " 
Hearing these words of Guha uttered with affection, Shri 
Bharata answered him, saving : " O King, we have passed this 
night in peace, having been highly honoured by thee. Now 
let thy servants convey our army over the river." 
Guha hastily returned to his city and spake thus to his servants 
and relatives : " Brothers, arise, awake, may you ever be 
fortunate ! Bring boats to the bank and convey the army over 
the river ! " 
Thus addressed, the ferrymen arose and gathering five hundred 
boats together, brought them to the bank. A special barge that 
was seaworthy, named " Swastika ", hung with large bells and 
flying banners with apertures for air, was also furnished, whereon 
white woollen rugs were spread like carpets, small bells tinkling 
melodiously when it sailed. This barque was steered by Guha 
himself. On it stepped the illustrious Princes Bharata and 
Shatrughna with the Queens Kaushalya and Sumitra, and other 
ladies of high degree, preceded by their spiritual preceptors, the 
priests and learned brahmins ; finally, the baggage was loaded. 
At the time of departure, the noise of those burning the residue 
left by the army, of those who plunged into the holy Ganges 
end the porters bearing the baggage, ascended to the sky. The 
347 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
boats, crowded with attendants, guarded by picked ferrymen, 
sailing swiftly, conveyed them over the river. Many vessels 
contained women only, while others were rilled with horses or 
bullocks, carts, cattle and mules. 
Reaching the other bank of the river, the people disembarked, 
the ferrymen and Guha's relatives playing diverse games in the 
water as they returned. Some of the elephants, resembling 
mountains as they moved, were driven across by their mahouts, 
others crossed in boats, some on rafts and some swam. Guha's 
servants ferried the army over the river, before taking their 
morning bath. During the period of Maitra, following on the 
sunrise, the army crossed the sacred stream and entered the 
charming forest. 
Arriving at holy Prayaga, the magnanimous Bharata spoke 
encouraging words to the army and ordered them to camp at 
ease. Then the prince accompanied by the Guru Vasishtha 
and other priests, went to see the Sage Bharadwaja. 
Approaching the hermitage of that learned and illumined sage, 
the son of Brihaspati, they beheld in the dense and delightful 
forest, charming huts thatched with leaves. 
CHAPTER 90 
Prince Bharata with Shri Vasishtha visit the Sage Bharadwaja's 
hermitage 
Bharata, beholding the hermitage of the Sage Bharadwaja, 
leaving his army a league behind and laying aside his weapons 
and royal apparel, attired in a simple silken garment, proceeded 
on foot, preceded by bis preceptor. Perceiving the sage himself, 
he left his counsellors and followed Shri Vasishtha only. The 
great ascetic Bharadwaja, beholding Prince Bharata approaching, 
rising from his seat, commanded his disciples to bring the 
arghya. The muni advancing to greet Shri Vasishtha, Prince 
Bharata offered salutations to him, the sage recognizing him as 
the son of King Dasaratha. The Sage Bharadwaja then calling 
348 
AYODHYA KANDA 
for the ritual appointments presented them with the arghya, 
and refreshed them with fruits ; he then enquired respecting 
their welfare and if all were well in Ayodhya. Then he asked 
concerning the state treasury and the ministers, but, knowing 
the king to be dead, he made no enquiry concerning him. 
In return, Shri Vasishtha and Bharata enquired as to the health 
of the sage, the state of his body, the sacred fire, his disciples, 
the deer and the birds. The great ascetic Bharadwaja informed 
them respecting all these things and then, prompted by the 
affection he bore for Shri Rama, said to Bharata : " O Prince, 
what occasion has brought thee hither, who art now the ruler 
of the kingdom ? Tell me all. King Dasaratha, urged by his 
consort, banished Prince Rama to the forest, for the period 
of fourteen years. I trust that thou, desirous of enjoying the 
kingdom without reserve, art not the harbourer of ill-will to 
thy brother ? " 
Bitterly wounded by the rishi's words, Prince Bharata, his eyes 
suffused with tears, his throat choked with emotion, said: 
" O Lord, thou art all-knowing, if thou dost thus regard me, 
then my life is vain. I am in no way implicated in the fate 
of Shri Rama. Such villainy would never proceed from me. 
O My Lord, why dost thou charge me thus ? That which 
my mother has done, on my account, is not approved by me, 
nor should I ever condone it. I go to gratify that great prince, 
by offering salutations to him and with the intention of bringing 
him back to the capital. O Divine One, this is my purpose, 
be pleased to tell me where Rama, now the lord of the earth, 
is to be found ? " 
Requested likewise by Shri Vasishtha and the other priests, 
Shri Bharadwaja, captivated by the words of Bharata, answered : 
" O Great One, thou art born in the illustrious family of Raghu, 
and it is therefore not a source of wonder that dutiful regard 
for thy preceptor, self-control and the following of the path 
of the wise, are all united in thee ! By my yogic powers, the 
contents of thy heart were known to me, but I questioned thee, 
that thy resolution might be established, and thy fame proclaimed 
throughout the whole world. It is known to me where Shri 
Rama and Lakshmana conversant with righteousness, abide. 
They dwell on the great mountain Chittrakuta ; do thou go 
349 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
thither to-morrow. To-day, stay here with thy counsellors. 
O Wise One, do thou accede to my request." 
Then Bharata, the prince of great renown, accepted the offer 
of the sage and remained all that night at his hermitage. 
CHAPTER 91 
Sage Bharadwaja entertains the whole army 
Prince Bharata, having decided to remain in the hermitage, 
the sage invited him to a repast. Shri Bharata said : " O Holy 
Lord, thou hast already entertained me with water, fruit and 
berries, I am wholly satisfied.*' 
Shri Bharadwaja smilingly answered : " I know thee to be 
pleased with whatever is lovingly offered to thee, but, O Prince, 
I desire to entertain thy whole army, it is meet that thou accede 
to my request. O Great Prince, why art thou come, leaving 
thine army at a distance ? Why didst thou come unattended 
by thine army ? " 
Hearing these words, Prince Bharata answered with humility : 
" O Lord, I did not come attended by mine army, in deference 
to thee. It becomes a king or a king's son to protect the 
hermitages of his kingdom 1 O Lord ! I am accompanied by 
many horses and wild elephants occupying a vast area. Fearing 
lest they should destroy the trees, the thatched huts and defile 
the water of the ponds and wells, I came alone, leaving them 
behind." 
Then the Maharishi Bharadwaja said : " Bring thine army 
hither." 
Thus commanded, the prince brought his army thither. 
Entering the sacrificial pavilion, the rishi drank three times of 
the water there, and reciting a certain formula, sprinkled some 
on his body. Then invoking Vishwakarma1 to provide the 
entertainment, and speaking slowly, he said : " I summon the 
celestial beings, Vishwakarma and Twashta, let them prepare 
1 Vixhwakarma— the architect of the god*. 
350 
AYODHYA KANDA 
dwellings for the army. I desire to offer Prince Bharata 
hospitality, I therefore call upon the deities Yama, Varuna, 
Kuvera and also Indra. Let them assist me in providing the 
entertainment. I also summon all the rivers, flowing above 
or below from east to west and from west to east. Let some 
of these produce the delicious wine named Maireya1 and that 
named Saura>2 and also cool, sweet water, like the juice of the 
sugar cane. I summon further the heavenly musicians called 
Haha and Huhu, together with other divine beings and nymphs. 
I summon the dancing apsaras, Ghritachi, Vishwachi, Mishra keshi, Alambusha, Nagadanta, Hema and Soma, who dwell in 
the Himalayas. I call on the dancing nymphs attendant on 
Brahma and Indra; let them attire themselves in beautiful 
apparel, bringing their instruments. I desire the celestial forest 
Chaitraratha to appear here, the leaves of whose trees are formed 
like beautiful damsels. I desire further foods of many kinds 
that can be chewed, sucked or licked, and various drinks to be 
prepared by the deity presiding over the moon. Let garlands 
of fresh flowers be made ready and beautiful goblets and different 
dishes of flesh be produced here instantaneously ! " 
By his yogic power and the proper recitation of the sacred 
mantras, the holy Sage Bharadwaja produced all that was 
necessary. Facing the east in the posture of invitation, Shri 
Bharadwaja sat in meditation for a space. Then, one by one, 
the gods appeared before him. The cool, slow and fragrant 
breezes blowing from the Malaya and Dadura mountains, 
tempered the heat. The clouds rained down flowers and the 
sound of the divine dundubhis (drums) was heard ; delightful 
zephyrs began to blow, nymphs danced, the celestial musicians 
sang and the notes of the vina were heard everywhere. The earth 
and the sky were filled with sweet and harmonious sounds, 
heard by all living beings. As the divine music continued, 
Bharata's army beheld the wonderful structure wrought by 
Vishwakarma. They perceived the whole area within a radius 
of four miles, to be covered with a carpet of green and glistening 
grass sparkling like a green emerald. Its beauty was enhanced 
1 Maireya or Mireya — A kind of intoxicating liquor made of the blossoms of 
Lythrum Fructicosum with sugar. 
* Saura — a celestial drink, " Saura " meaning " relating " to the sun. 
351 2A 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
by silwa,1 kapitha,1 amlaki1 and mango trees. A wood appeared 
wherein people could wander, also a divine stream flowing 
between banks adorned by various trees. Beautiful white 
mansions were erected, with stables for elephants and horses. 
Palaces with their balconies decorated with leaves and flowers 
were to be seen, and others adorned with green and flowery 
sprays and garlands of pure white blossoms sprinkled with 
scented water. These dwellings contained square courts 
serving as reception halls with space for palanquins, and coaches. 
Food of all kinds, rice, the juice of sugar cane and every variety 
of confection was to be found there, with curry puffs, pancakes 
and other delicious dishes served in clean vessels, while excellent 
carpets and seats were spread for relaxation, and couches with 
spotless coverings and quilts. 
Entering these mansions with the permission of the Sage 
Bharadwaja, Prince Bharata was followed by his servants, 
ministers and priests who, perceiving all to be well furnished, 
were highly gratified. 
In one of the mansions, a room was set apart containing 
a throne where retainers holding the canopy and chamara were 
in attendance. Bharata with his ministers, circumambulated 
the royal dais as if it were occupied by Shri Rama and bowing 
to it respectfully, Shri Bharata, holding the chamara, occupied 
a lower seat, the counsellors, priests and army commanders 
assuming positions in accordance with their respective rank. 
Now, at the command of the holy sage, streams of milk, 
thickened with rice, flowed before Bharata's eyes. Beautiful 
houses, washed with quicklime, appeared on the river banks. 
Twenty thousand youthful women, enchantingly attired and 
wearing beautiful ornaments came there at the instance of 
Brahma. Kuvera also sent twenty thousand lovely damsels 
adorned with gold, gems and pearls. Further twenty thousand 
nymphs from the region of Indra appeared, whose beauty caused 
men to lose their reason. Narada, Gopha and other brilliant 
musicians began to sing and play before Bharata, and the celestial 
nymphs to dance in the presence of the prince, at the rishi's 
command. All the flowers most highly esteemed in the celestial 
gardens among the gods, were seen at Prayaga, through the power 
1 For plants and trees, sec separate glossary. 
35* 
AYODHYA KANDA 
of Bharadwaja. The trees applauded, the bahadur tree per formed on the cymbals and the pipal danced, through the 
influence of the sage, and those named devaparna, tala and 
kuraka assumed the form of dwarfs ! Plants by the name of 
shingsapa, amalaki and jambu, and twining creepers such as 
the jasmine and mallika, taking on the shape of women in the 
hermitage of Bharadwaja, cried out : " O Wine-Bibbers, drink ! 
O Hungry Ones, eat kheeva ! Come, fill yourselves with the 
various kinds of meat ! " 
Each person was bathed in the cool river and attended by 
seven or eight beautiful maidens with lustrous eyes, who 
massaged their body with oil and unguents. Their bath 
completed, many women dried them with soft cloths and gave 
them sweetened water, tasting like ambrosia, to drink. 
The keepers attended carefully to the horses, elephants, 
mules, camels and bullocks. Those steeds belonging to the 
royal stables and ridden by great generals, were fed by the 
grooms on bundles of sugar cane and parched and sweetened 
rice, their attendants and mahouts could hardly recognize their 
charges. The soldiery were now intoxicated with wine and 
indulging in every pleasure ! Each was gratified in whatever 
he desired ; their bodies anointed with sandalwood paste and 
united with the nymphs in amorous dalliance, they exclaimed : 
" We will neither go to Ayodhya nor enter the Dandaka 
forest ! Let Bharata live at ease and Shri Rama dwell in the 
forest ! ** 
Thus did the warriors and grooms express themselves in the 
state of inebriation, while thousands of soldiers, in exultation, 
shouted aloud : " Verily, this is heaven ! " Running hither 
and thither with garlands round their necks, innumerable soldiers 
danced, sang and laughed. Though they had partaken to the 
full of excellent dishes, sweet as nectar, yet when they perceived 
fresh articles of food, they could not restrain themselves from 
eating anew ! 
Thousands of messengers, servants and the wives of the 
soldiery, putting on colourful raiment, displayed themselves 
with pride. Elephants, horses, camels, deer and birds were 
fully satisfied ; none wanted for anything ! No one, in the 
army of Bharata, was seen in soiled garments or hungry or 
353 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
unkempt, none was seen with an unclean countenance or 
uncombed hair ! 
The men beheld countless dishes of mutton, pork, venison 
and other meats cooked in fruit-juices and fried in butter with 
cloves, caraway seeds and lentils simmering gently in them. 
Thousands of vessels were filled with spiced rice, garnished 
with flowers and flags. All were speechless with wonder on 
beholding them ! Within a radius of five miles, the wells were 
filled with frumenty (kheeva) and cows like Kamadhenu fulfilled 
every desire I The trees dripped honey and the lakes were filled 
with the sparkling wine Maireya, and banked with dressed 
viands such as deer, chickens and peacocks. Hundreds and 
thousands of dishes were provided, and myriads of vessels filled 
with curds, mixed with caraway seeds, ginger and other fragrant 
spices, were served there. Lakes of yoghourt and milk, together 
with heaps of sugar, were to be seen on the river banks, as also 
fragrant crushed leaves and unguents with large pots of sandal wood paste, mirrors and towels ! An abundance of sandals 
and shoes were provided, whilst antimony, combs, brushes, 
parasols, bows and quivers, armour and ornamental seats were 
placed here and there ! Tanks, full of liquid mixed with herbs 
to promote digestion, were taken to the banks of lakes where 
descent was easy, and where the people could bathe freely and 
drink when they pleased ! These lakes were filled with pure 
water, abounding in lotuses and fringed with tender grass of 
blue and emerald hue ; here, resting places for the beasts were 
also to be found. 
Prince Bharata's companions were astounded at the entertain ment provided by the Maharishi Bharadwaja. All passed the 
night in amusement, as in the garden of Indra ! 
At dawn, the rivers, celestial musicians and nymphs took leave 
of the maharishi and returned to their own abode. But Prince 
Bharata's followers were still flushed and inebriated, their bodies 
painted with sandalwood, the flower garlands in heaps like 
mountains, lying everywhere, scattered and trampled on by men 
and beasts. 
354 
AYODHYA KANDA 
CHAPTER 92 
Prince Bharata with the army departs for Mount Chittrakuta 
Prince Bharata, having passed the night in enjoyment of the 
entertainment provided, early in the morning, desirous of seeing 
Rama, approached the muni. 
With joined palms, he stood before the holy rishi who was 
engaged in the fire ritual. 
The Sage Bharadwaja enquired of him, saying : " O Sinless 
Prince, didst thou pass the night in my hermitage in peace ? 
Are all satisfied with the meagre entertainment provided by 
me?" 
Shri Bharata, offering salutations to the maharishi, who had 
come out from his hermitage replied : " 0 Blessed Lord, I and 
my whole army have been rendered completely happy in thy 
hermitage, thou hast fully satisfied us all. My people have 
passed the night agreeably, they have slept in excellent houses 
and partaken of delicious dishes, and have lost all sense of 
the fatigue caused by the journey. O Great Sage, now allow 
me to take leave of thee and go to my brother ; look on me with 
favour, I beg of the™,. O Wise One, how far from here is the 
hermitage of the pious Rama and which is the way thither ? " 
The sage, eminent in ascetic practices, replied to Bharata, 
who desired to see his brother : " O Prince, at ten miles' distance 
from here, in a field full of boulders, is the beautiful mountain 
named Chittrakuta ! To the north of that mountain flows the 
river Mandakini, winding through flowery forests, its banks 
planted with blossoming trees. O Friend, close to that river, 
on the Chittrakuta mountain, thou shalt find thy two brothers 
dwelling in a thatched hut. O Fortunate Prince, on the southern 
bank of the Yamuna, thou wilt see two paths, do thou take 
the right path with thine army, horses and elephants I This 
path will take thee to Shri Rama." 
At the moment of departure the consorts of King Dasaratha, 
descending from their chariots, came to the place where the 
great sage was and stood encircling him. Among them the frail 
355 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
and trembling Kaushalya and Sumitra touched the feet of the 
holy man. Then Kaikeyi, thwarted in her designs and despised 
by the whole world, touched the feet of the sage and circum ambulated him. Grief-stricken, she stood at a little distance 
from Bfaarata, as the holy Bharadwaja addressed the prince, 
saying : " O Prince, I desire to be acquainted with thy mothers." 
The ever eloquent Bharata answered humbly : " O Holy 
Lord, here is my father's chief queen, wretched and weakened 
through fasting, yet resembling a goddess. She is the mother 
of that Lion among men, the highly intrepid Prince Rama ! 
Comparable to Aditi who brought forth Prajapati, she has 
given birth to Raghava ! She, who leaning on her arm, stands 
with a sorrowful heart, like the branch of the karnikara tree 
stripped of its flowers, is the Queen Sumitra, the mother of 
those heroes of truth, Shri Lakshmana and Shatrughna. O 
Great Sage, she who has brought great affliction on these two 
chiefs of men and caused the death of King Dasaratha by 
separating him from his sons, who is given to anger and who 
is vain and shallow, esteeming herself favoured, who is highly 
ambitious and fickle and yet looks upon herself as free from 
imperfection, that cruel and wicked Kaikeyi, is my mother ! O 
Great Muni, it is she who has caused my great misfortune ! " 
Unable to utter further, his throat choked with emotion, the 
prince began to sigh heavily, his eyes inflamed, breathing like 
a provoked serpent. Then the holy sage, acquainted with what 
should come to pass, answered saying : " My Son, do not 
reproach Queen Kaikeyi, the exile of Shri Rama will be 
productive of great good and the gods and danavas and the 
illustrious sages will gain great benefit from the presence of 
Shri Rama in the forest 1 " 
Hearing this, Bharata bowed low to the rishi and receiving 
his blessing, circumambulated him with reverence. Then craving 
permission from the sage to depart, he ordered his army to 
prepare to march. 
The leaders of the forces mounted their horses, while others, 
ascending golden chariots, started on their journey. Elephants 
with howdahs fixed by golden chains and adorned with fluttering 
flags went forward, the bells hanging from the male and female 
tuskers causing a sound like the thunder of the clouds at the end 
35« 
AYODHYA KANDA 
of the rainy season ! The other vehicles large and small, 
conveying members of the royal family advanced also. 
Shri Bharata, intent on seeing Rama, riding in a resplendent 
palanquin shining like the sun or moon, with his great army, 
moved towards the south, covering the earth like a vast cloud. 
The horses and elephants were all contented and the vast 
concourse inspiring the wild deer and birds with terror, looked 
splendid as it entered the deep forest. 
chapter 93 
They behold the hermitage of Shri Rama 
As the mighty army traversed the forest, the leaders of the herds 
of wild elephants with their companions, ran away in alarm. 
Bears, leopards and other fierce beasts could be seen fleeing 
on the hilltops and by the banks of the river. 
Supremely gratified, Prince Bharata proceeded in the midst 
of his soldiers who shouted as they marched. The army of 
the illustrious Bharata, resembled an ocean, whose waves spread 
over the earth or like the clouds covering the sky during the 
rainy season. The ground for miles was covered with elephants 
and horses, so that no trace of it could be seen. 
Having marched a considerable distance, Shri Bharata, 
perceiving his animals to be fatigued, addressed the holy priest, 
Shri Vasishtha, saying: "This country appears to be as 
beautiful as described to me, I deem that we have reached that 
place spoken of by the Sage Bharadwaja. This mountain is 
Chittrakuta, and this is the Mandakini river, and this is the 
forest which, from a distance, resembled a blue cloud. These 
are the glorious peaks of Chittrakuta, which are being trodden 
by my great elephants ! See, O Holy Guru, as the dark clouds 
pour down water in the rainy season, so do the elephants, 
whose trunks are scarred by the waving branches of the trees, 
scatter flowers on the hills. 
"O Shatrughna, behold the lovely Chittrakuta mountain 
357 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
sought after by the gods ; everywhere herds of deer wander 
about enhancing its beauty, like crocodiles swimming gracefully 
in the sea. As clouds driven by the wind in winter adorn the 
sky, so do these deer running before the army, render the forest 
delightful. 
" Our soldiers decorating their heads with flowers, resemble 
the people of the south who crown themselves with blossoms. 
See, O Shatrughna, the forest that appeared terrifying and 
seemed to breathe by being filled with men, resembles Ayodhya 
itself! 
" The dust rising from the hoofs of the bullocks covers the sky 
and settles there, till the wind quickly dispels it, as if those 
things obstructing my vision of Shri Rama were being removed 
from my eyes. O Shatrughna, behold these horses yoked to 
the chariots with their charioteers, swiftly passing through the 
forest ! And see those beautiful peacocks with long feathers, 
running in fear towards their habitation on the mountain. O 
Sinless Brother, this place appears enchanting to me and a fit 
abode for ascetics. 
" How lovely are the spotted deer wandering about with their 
hinds ; they appear as if studded with flowers. Let my leaders 
go forward and seek out the place where Shri Rama and 
Lakshmana dwell." 
Hearing the words of Shri Bharata, the warriors bearing 
weapons in their hands, entered the forest and there perceived 
a spot where smoke was ascending. On beholding this, they 
returned to Prince Bharata and communicated to him their 
belief, that the two royal brothers dwelt where the smoke arose. 
They said : " If it be not Shri Rama and Lakshmana yonder, 
then surely it is some devotee who can inform us concerning the 
dwelling place of Raghava ! " 
Hearing this pleasing report, Shri Bharata addressed the 
leaders of the army saying : " Do you remain here, do not 
proceed further, I, with the holy Guru Vasishtha and Sumantra 
will go forward to that place." 
Thus commanded the warriors halted and Shri Bharata 
looked towards the spot where the smoke was visible. Observing 
the smoke, the warriors, waiting at that place, rejoiced, believing 
the time for the meeting with Shri Rama was at hand. 
358 
AYODHYA KANDA 
CHAPTER 94 
Shri Rama decides to spend his exile on the mountain 
Shri Rama who had passed many days on that mountain, 
gratified Shri Sita by showing her many scenes of natural beauty, 
they themselves appearing as lovely as Indra and bis consort. 
Shri Rama said : " O Fortunate One, beholding the beauty 
of this pleasant mountain, no longer does the separation from 
my friends or my country cause me pain ! O Centre of Delight ! 
behold the loveliness of these peaks abounding in metals of 
various kinds, reaching the skies and frequented by birds of 
every species ! These peaks, some of which shine like silver, 
some of which are ruddy, some yellow, some glittering with 
the splendour of the brilliant gems concealed in them ; some 
sparkling with sapphire and crystal, and some resembling quick silver and glittering like the stars ! Though many lions and 
leopards abound in the forest, yet influenced by the pure nature 
of the ascetics dwelling here, they have ceased to follow their 
cruel instincts. Many varieties of birds have their nests on 
yonder hill, trees laden with fruit and flowers affording delightful 
shade, render the mountain enchanting ! 
" Here are mango, jambu, asana, lohdra, piyala, panasa, 
dhuva, ankotha, bhavya, tinisha, bilwa, tindura, bamboo, 
kasanari, arista, varana, madhuca, tilaka, vadari, amlaka, nipa, 
vetra, dhanwaria, vijaka and other trees. 
" O Auspicious Princess, behold the ravishing loveliness of 
these hills where the wise kinneras wander in pairs, their 
swords and coloured apparel hanging on the branches. See the 
charming retreats of the vidya dharas1 and their companions. 
These mountains with their cascades and bubbling springs 
appear like mighty elephants the ichor flowing from their 
foreheads. 
" What mind would not be filled with delight by the breezes 
issuing from the caves of the mountain, redolent with fragrance, 
pleasing to the senses ? O Peerless One, if it be for me to 
1 Vidya Dharas — " Possessors of Knowledge ", a class of deities attendan 
oa Indra. 
359 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
dwell here with thee and Lakshmana for innumerable years, 
no grief or anxiety will visit me. O Lovely Lady, on the 
mountain of Chittrakuta, rendered pleasant by a profusion of 
flowers and fruits, whose delightful peaks echo with the sweet 
song of birds, I am content to dwell ! By residing here, two 
objects have been achieved, the fulfilment of my father's vow 
and the satisfaction of Prince Bharata. O Daughter of King 
Videha, behold this enchanting spot where self-control and 
asceticism are easily exercised. Say, art thou happy here? 
The discipline of residence in the forest is declared by royal 
sages to be a means to liberation. Our ancestors such as Manu 
have held that residence in the forest is the means of acquiring 
the form of the gods. Behold, O Princess, yonder mountain, 
adorned by thousands of rocks blue, yellow, purple and white. 
At night, the healing herbs shine like fire, lighting the crags 
with their radiance. See, O Princess, some of the caves 
resemble houses, some appear like flower gardens, all enhancing 
the glory of the mountain. It would seem that Chittrakuta 
has sprung forth from the earth and from every side appears 
incomparably beautiful. Observe, O Auspicious One, how 
those devoted to pleasure, have spread couches here and there, 
and covered them with azure lotuses overlaid with coverings 
of bark. See the faded garlands cast aside by them and the rinds 
of many fruits of which they have partaken. 
" This mountain Chittrakuta, in variety of flowers and trans parent waters, has surpassed the capital of Indra in loveliness. 
O Sita, I will pass the twelve years here with Prince Lakshmana 
and thee ; pursuing the highest virtue and discipline, I shall 
thus protect my kingdom and earn merit." 
chapter 95 
He points out the beauties of nature to Sita 
Having pointed out the beauty of the hills to Sita, Raghava 
now showed her the pleasant river Mandakini issuing from 
the mountain. The lotus-eyed Lord addressed the daughter 
360 
AYODHYA KANDA 
of King Janata, whose countenance resembled the moon, 
saying : " O Princess, behold the river Mandakini with its 
delightful banks frequented by swans, cranes and other water fowl, abounding in flowering trees of different kinds, which 
cause it to resemble the river Sangandhika in the region of 
Kuvera. Its pleasant fords, where I desire to bathe, the waters 
of which have been rendered muddy by the herds of deer who 
have come to drink and recently departed, all these attract the 
heart. O Dear One, the ascetics attired in robes of bark and 
deerskin, bathe at stated seasons in this river. O Princess 
of beautiful eyes, here the munis observing strict and austere 
vows, stand with uplifted arms, worshipping the sun. The 
trees agitated by the breeze, cause the hills to appear as if they 
were dancing. The blossoms scattered by the force of the wind 
make it seem as if Chittrakuta were offering flowers to the river. 
O Auspicious One, here the waters of Mandakini sparkle like 
gems and there they form a sandy beach. Groups of perfect 
beings frequent the banks. O Princess, behold the heaps of 
flowers shaken down from the branches by the wind, and others 
floating through the air and falling into the river to be carried 
away by the water. O Kalyani, behold the wild geese standing 
in the shallows, uttering sweet cries to summon their mates 
or diverting themselves with them. O Lovely Sita, when I 
behold the Chittrakuta mountain and the river Mandakini in 
company with thee, I esteem it a greater joy than any Ayodhya 
could yield me. Come, O Sita, and let us two bathe in the 
river Mandakini, frequented by perfect beings who are endowed 
with inner and outer control and are devoted to the practice of 
austerity. O Princess, thou didst formerly play with thy maids 
of honour in Ayodhya, to-day amuse thyself with me in the 
Mandakini river, pelting me with red and white lotuses and 
splashing the waters over me. O Dear One, imagine those 
dwelling here to be the citizens of Ayodhya and the Mandakini 
to be the river Sarayu. O Sita, I am happy with thee, who art 
obedient to my command as is also Prince Lakshmana. O 
Beloved, bathing thrice a day with thee in the river and living 
on honey, fruits and berries, I feel no desire for the comforts 
of the kingdom of Ayodhya. Who will not be happy, dwelling 
on the banks of the river Mandakini, where herds of elephants 
3«i 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
wander and lions and monkeys come to quench their thirst; 
and where flowers grow throughout the year ? " 
Thus Shri Rama conversed on many wondrous things 
concerning the Mandakini river with Sita and taking the hand 
of the princess, wandered with her over the blue and beautiful 
Cbittrakuta mountain. 
chapter 96 
They see the army approaching and Lakshmana vows 
to destroy it 
Having shown Sita the beauties of the river Mandakini, Rama 
and Sita seated themselves on a rock. Feasting Videhi1 with 
venison, Shri Rama, in order to please her, spoke in this wise : 
" This meat is pure and is rendered delicious by being roasted 
in the fire." 
While thus conversing with Sita, he observed the dust rising 
like a cloud, stirred up by the feet of the approaching army 
of Bharata and heard the tramp of marching warriors at the 
sound of which the leaders of the elephants with their herds, 
ran hither and thither in agitation. Seeing the herds of elephants 
fleeing at the tumult caused by the army, Shri Rama said to 
Lakshmana : " O Lakshmana, Queen Sumitra is fortunate indeed 
to be thy mother. Is this warlike clamour issuing from the 
clouds ? The herds of elephants dwelling in the dense forest, 
the wild buffaloes and the deer are fleeing away in terror ! 
Has any king or prince come to hunt in the woods, or has 
some terrible and bloodthirsty beast entered the forest ? Enquire 
into the matter, O Lakshmana ! Even the birds are not carefree 
in their flight ; it becomes thee to seek out the cause of this 
commotion." 
Speedily climbing a shala tree, Shri Lakshmana looked in all 
directions. First he examined the eastern quarter, then he looked 
1 Videhi — a name of Sita, as daughter of the King of Vidcha. 
362 
AYODHYA KANDA 
towards the north and there he beheld a vast army composed 
of elephants, horses, chariots and well-armed infantry ! 
Describing the approaching army with its elephants, horses, 
chariots and flags, Shri Lakshmana said to Rama : " O Great 
One, put out the fire and let Sita enter the cave, do thou 
arm thyself and take up thy bow and arrow." 
Shri Rama answered Lakshmana saying : " O Child, ascertain 
by the symbols on the flags to whom this army belongs." 
The prince listened to Rama's words and burning with anger 
desirous of consuming the army, replied : " Without doubt, 
Bharata, having secured the throne has come to slay us both 
in order to enjoy rulership, unopposed ! See, by that large 
and beautiful tree is a chariot with a white flag bearing the sign 
of a pomegranate tree. The soldiers mounted on swift moving 
horses are coming towards me. I see the riders on elephants 
also. O Hero, let us both, armed with bows and arrows, climb 
the hill, or clad in battle array, stand here fully prepared. We 
shall surely defeat Bharata. To-day, we shall subdue him on 
whose account all our sufferings have come to pass. O Rama, 
that Bharata, on whose account, thou, Sita and I, have been 
deprived of our kingdom and cast into tribulation, is approaching 
like an enemy. He must certainly be slain, O Prince, I see 
no sin in destroying him. It were no sin to slay one who seeks 
to injure thee. O Prince, he has already wronged thee ; by 
slaying Bharata, thou canst acquire mastery over the whole 
earth. To-day, Kaikeyi, avid for the kingdom, will see her son 
slain in the field. Seeing Bharata slain by me, like a tree 
uprooted by an elephant, Kaikeyi will suffer great anguish ! 
I shall slay Kaikeyi also, and her friends and Manthara too. O 
Bestower of Honour, I will free the world of the sinful Kaikeyi ; 
to-day I will let loose my long restrained wrath on the forces 
of mine enemy, as a fire consumes dried grass. To-day, I will 
drench the fields of Chittrakuta with the blood of mine enemies. 
To-day, those elephants, wounded by my sharp arrows and 
those men slain by me, will be dragged hither and thither by 
wild beasts. To-day, I will redeem my vow, by destroying 
Bharata and his army with my bow and arrow." 
3«3 
THE RAMAYAKA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 97 
Shri Rama cannot believe Prince Bharata comes as an enemy 
Seeing Lakshmana overcome with anger and desire for ven geance, Shri Rama sought to pacify him saying : " O Lakshmana, 
the learned warrior Bharata, fully armed, is coming to see us 
in person, of what value is shield or sword ? What should I do 
with a kingdom obtained by slaying my brother Bharata, I having 
undertaken to fulfil my father's behests ? I will never accept 
riches obtained by the slaying of relatives and friends which 
would be as acceptable to me as food mixed with poison ! O 
Lakshmana, I promise thee, it is for the sake of my brothers 
that I desire to pursue virtue, legitimately acquired wealth, 
pleasures, and even the kingdom. O Lakshmana, I speak the 
truth, by this sign, touching my arms, ' I desire a kingdom only 
for the sake of supporting my brothers and securing their good \ 
O Charming Prince ! The acquisition of the kingdom is not 
difficult to me, but O, My Brother, I do not even desire dominion 
of the celestial region if it can only be acquired by unrighteous 
means E O Dear One ! May the Deity of Fire consume all 
that gives me joy, if it is not for thy good and to the advantage 
of Bharata and Shatrughna ! It seems to me that when my 
dearest brother, ever devoted to me, returned to Ayodhya from 
the home of his maternal uncle, after hearing that we three, 
robed in bark had entered the forest, he, overwhelmed by 
affection and grief, set out hither to seek us ! I see no other 
purpose for his advent here. Or it may be that Bharata, wroth 
with his mother has reproached her with bitter words and has 
come here to be reconciled with me. It is meet that Bharata 
should see me and I cannot believe that he comes as an enemy. 
What harm has Bharata ever done to us, O Brother, that to-day, 
thou assumest him to be against us ? It is improper for thee 
to speak ill or harshly of Bharata. Those bitter things thou 
sayest of Bharata, thou hast in fact said of me. O Son of 
Sumitra, how should a father slay his son, or a brother slay 
his brother, whatever betide ? If thou hast said all this on 
account of the kingdom, then I will desire Bharata to give thee 
364 
AYODHYA KANDA 
the kingdom. O Lakshmana, if I say to Bharata ' Give the 
crown to Lakshmana *, assuredly he will answer ' Be it so V* 
Shii Lakshmana was profoundly humiliated by the words 
of Rama, his limbs and muscles contracted and he was sunk 
in shame. He said : " It appears that the Maharaja Dasaratha 
himself has come hither to see us." 
Seeing Lakshmana abashed, Shri Rama answered : " I also 
believe my father is come to see us, and will seek to take us home 
to the capital, knowing how grievously we suffer in the forest ! " 
" It may be, too, that the king, knowing Sita to be worthy 
of every happiness, will take her home. See, O Brother, two 
excellent horses of noble breed, swift as the wind, appear in 
view ! The great and aged elephant Shatrunjaya that carries 
my illustrious father, marches before the army, but I feel 
apprehensive for I do not behold the white umbrella of my 
renowned Lord ! O Lakshmana, descend from the tree." 
The prince having descended in obedience to Shri Rama, 
stood before him with joined palms. 
Shri Bharata meanwhile commanded his army not to approach 
or disturb the hermitage of Rama. The army with its elephants 
and horses occupied an area of seven miles and the prudent 
Bharata who, to please Rama, had rid himself of all egoity and 
employed only virtuous means, caused it to take up its position 
at some distance from the Chittrakuta mountain. 
chapter 98 
Prince Bharata goes on foot to meet Shri Rama 
That exalted one, Shri Bharata, truly obedient to the behests 
of his Guru, perceiving his army well lodged, proceeded on foot 
to meet Shri Rama. As soon as the army was encamped, he 
addressed Shatrughna in these words : " O Excellent One, 
thou with thy men and a few huntsmen, speedily search the forest 
and seek out Shri Rama's hermitage. Let Guha attended by 
8 thousand of his warriors, armed with bows, arrows and swords, 
365 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
search for Shri Rama in the forest. I, myself, in the company 
of the counsellors, citizens, elders and brahmins, will go on 
foot through the forest I shall not rest till I have beheld the 
saintly Rama, the valiant Lakshmana and the most auspicious 
Sits. I shall not seek repose till I have looked on the shining 
countenance of Shri Rama, my elder brother. My mind will 
taste no peace till I have placed my forehead at the feet of Rama, 
that bear the marks of royalty. My soul will find no delight 
till I have placed Shri Rama on the ancestral throne and beheld 
him anointed with the holy water at the time of his coronation ! 
Fortunate is Prince Lakshmana, who looks on the moon-like, 
lotus-eyed resplendent face of Rama, each day. Blessed is the 
daughter of King Janaka, who follows Shri Rama, the Lord 
of earth and ocean ! Blessed also is Chittrakuta, equal to 
the Himalayas, on which Shri Rama dwells, as Kuvera and 
Chittraratha dwell in the forest. Blessed is this forest to-day, 
abounding in poisonous serpents and difficult to penetrate, 
because the mighty warrior Rama abides in it." 
Thus speaking, the valiant Prince Bharata entered the forest 
on foot. The chief of eloquent persons, the pious Bharata, 
reached the centre of the forest, where blossoming and fruitful 
trees adorned the mountain heights. Climbing a shala tree, 
he saw the smoke rising from the fire in Rama's hermitage. 
The prince with his friends rejoiced like those who have crossed 
the ocean, to find the dwelling place of Rama. Finding that 
Shri Ramachandra dwelt on the mountain frequented by ascetics, 
Shri Bharata, leaving his army behind, in the company of Guha 
speedily started for the hermitage. 
chapter 99 
The four brothers meet with tears of joy 
Shri Bharata with great eagerness pointed out the indications 
of the position of Shri Rama's hermitage to his brother 
Shatrughna. He appealed to Shri Vasishtha to bring his mothers 
366 
AYODHYA KANDA 
there speedily, while he, devoted to his elder brother, hastily 
went on before. Sumantra followed Shatrughna, who walked 
behind Bharata and who was equally anxious to behold Rama. 
The prince, proceeding, at length descried the hut thatched 
with leaves in the midst of the hermitages of the ascetics, and 
beheld before it a heap of broken wood and flowers plucked 
for worship. To mark the site of the ashrama, Shri Rama and 
Lakshmana had bound kusha grass and strips of cloth to the 
trees. He perceived also great heaps of the dung of deer and 
buffaloe, dried for fuel, to be used in winter. 
The illustrious and mighty Bharata going forward, spoke 
measured words to his brother and counsellors, saying : " I 
deem we have reached the place spoken of by the Sage 
Bharadwaja, and that the river Mandakini is not far distant 
from here ! Prince Lakshmana has bound strips of cloth to 
the trees, so that when fetching water on a dark night, he may 
know the way back to the hermitage. This appears to be the 
road traversed by the great elephants who were roaring in the 
forest. I perceive the black smoke rising from the ascetics' 
sacrificial fire. Here, I shall behold that Lion among men, 
Shri Rama, the great preceptor, seated in majesty, like a 
resplendent sage." 
Proceeding a little further, Prince Bharata reached the river 
Mandakini on Chittrakuta, and addressing his companions, said : 
" That chief of men, a very god among living beings, is seated 
in this lonely forest in the posture of an ascetic Woe unto me, 
wretched is my life and birth, on account of which the most 
resplendent Lord of all, Shri Ramachandra is plunged in this 
affliction and dwells in the forest deprived of all joy ! Despised 
by men because of this, I will now fall at the feet of Rama 
and Sita in order to propitiate them." 
While still lamenting, Bharata perceived the hut thatched 
with leaves, pure and pleasant, covered with the leafy boughs 
of sala, tala and other trees, resembling an altar covered with 
kusha grass. 
Here and there mighty bows and shields covered with gold, 
wielded in battle, hung, adding to the beauty of the place, and 
nearby stood a quiver of arrows, bright as the rays of the sun, 
and keen as the serpents with shining hoods of the Bhagawati 
367 2B 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
river. There also were two scimitars in scabbards of gold and 
two shields emblazoned with golden flowers, also many deerskins 
and gloves with gold embroidered gauntlets. That habitation 
was impregnable as a cave and unassailable by the herds of 
wild deer. 
Bharata discerned in this dwelling, Shri Rama seated near 
the altar, resplendent as tire. For a long time, Shri Bharata 
gazed on the beauty of the scene. He saw Rama sitting, his 
matted locks coiled on the crown of his head, shining like a flame, 
bis body clad in a robe of bark, covered with the skin of a 
black antelope, bis shoulders resembling a lion's, his arms 
were long, his eyes like lotuses, that ruler of earth and ocean, 
the sovereign of eternal decrees ! Shri Bharata beheld that 
righteous one with Lakshmana and Sita, seated on a platform 
strewn with kusha grass, appearing like the eternal Brahma. 
Beholding him seated thus, the pious Bharata was overpowered 
with sorrow and affection, and ran towards him, his throat 
choked with grief, weeping and lamenting. Though the pain was 
past restraining, he yet mastered it and spoke : "Alas ! my 
elder brother, worthy of a seat in the royal assembly, beloved 
of his counsellors, is to-day associating with wild beasts in the 
forest. He, deserving of apparel adorned with thousands of 
golden coins, is sitting, clad in a deerskin, in order to practise 
the obligations of righteous living. Shri Rama, who was 
formerly adorned with garlands of different flowers, how can 
he endure the weight of bis matted locks ? He, who should 
have acquired merit by the performance of sacrifices aided by 
the rishis, to-day increases bis meritorious deeds by the practice 
of austerity. Now is the countenance of my elder brother, 
formerly adorned with sandal paste, covered with dust 1 Alas ! 
it is on my account that Shri Rama, who formerly enjoyed 
every delight, is to-day undergoing this distress. Woe unto 
me, who am abhored by all." 
Thus lamenting, the wretched Bharata, his face bedewed with 
tears, sought to run and fall at the feet of Rama, but sank 
unconscious on the way. Deeply afflicted, that great hero, 
Prince Bharata, cried out : " O Excellent One," and uttered 
no more. Exclaiming only, " O Noble Sire ", he could proceed 
no further. Shatrughna, also weeping, embraced the feet of 
368 
AYODHYA KANDA 
Shri Rama, on which Rama gathering them both in his arms, 
melted into tears. 
Then Sumantra and Guha approached Shri Rama and 
Lakshmana, and it appeared as if the Sun and Moon, Jupiter 
and Venus had conjoined in the heavens. The inhabitants of 
the forest, beholding the four princes met together in their midst, 
shed tears of joy. 
CHAPTER IOO 
Shri Rama enquires of Prince Bharata concerning the discharge 
of his royal duties 
Shki Ramachandra saw Bharata lying on the ground, clothed 
in ascetic's garb, his hair coiled on the crown of his head, his 
palms joined in supplication, resembling the sun bereft of 
splendour, fallen to earth, at the time of the dissolution of the 
world. 
Taking hold of the hands of his brother, who was emaciated 
and weak, Shri Rama raised him up and smelling bis head, 
embraced him, clasping him in his arms and tenderly enquiring 
of him : " O Child, where is thy father, that thou art come 
to the forest alone? Had he lived, thou couldst not have 
come hither unaccompanied ! Alas ! I grieve that I scarcely 
recognize my brother, thin, weary and full of care. What 
brings thee to the forest ? O My Brother, is the king well 
and happy ? Or has grief brought about his end ? O Darling, 
thou art yet a child, tell me, is ought amiss in that eternal 
kingdom ? O Hero of Truth, hast thou served the king well ? 
Say, is that Sovereign of men, devoted to truth and to duty, 
the performer of the great sacrifice, in good health? Is 
that highly learned monarch, master of the ascetic brahmins, 
fully cherished? O Child, are Mother Kaushalya and 
Queen Sumitra, mother of an illustrious son, well ? Is that 
highly exalted Queen Kaushalya, happy? O Friend, dost 
thou sufficiently regard that humble, experienced, highborn, 
369 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
magnanimous companion of mine, he who is skilled in action, 
the son of Shri Vasishtha ? Does the royal priest, highly versed 
in the Veda, who is wise and beneficent, inform thee of the 
time of sacrifice ? O Brother, dost thou offer full reverence 
to the Gods, father, mother, Guru, thine elders, the physicians 
and brahmins? O Friend, dost thou give due respect and 
honour to Sudhama, skilled in the science of arms and 
conversant with the mantra-driven weapons ? Hast thou made 
those thy counsellors, who are trustworthy, patient, masters of 
ethics and who have transcended avarice ? O Prince, the good 
fortune of kings is secret consultation with those versed in the 
spiritual laws. My Son, hast thou overcome sleep ? Dost thou 
awaken betimes ? Dost thou in the late hours meditate on the 
methods of acquiring legitimate wealth ? Dost thou reflect 
alone on matters of moment and consult with thy ministers in 
public ? Do other monarchs know of thy decisions before they 
are applied ? When thou hast determined upon what must 
and should be done, dost thou speedily accomplish it ? Are 
lesser kings acquainted with thy determined resolve after the 
event or before thou hast set it in motion ? Dost thou prefer 
the society and advice of a learned pundit to that of countless 
fools ? In times of adversity, it is of infinite advantage to have 
the proximity of a learned man. If a sovereign surround 
himself with ten thousand ignorant persons, he will receive 
no help from them, but should a king be attended by a wise 
minister, thoughtful, studious, versed in the moral laws 
and government, he will reap a great advantage. O Brother, 
dost thou employ men of exalted character in affairs of moment 
and lesser ones in unimportant events ? Dost thou appoint 
ministers who are pure of heart, full of integrity and of a noble 
disposition, whose ancestors have served the crown in positions 
of authority ? O Son of Queen Kaikeyi, do the arrogant and 
proud, when incensed, offer thee or thy ministers insult ? As a 
woman disregards one who has illicit connection with another's 
wife or the priests condemn that man who has sinned while 
offering the sacrifice, so is a king despised who levies harsh taxes. 
That monarch who does not condemn a man to death, who has 
through avarice and deluded by ambition, accused others who 
are virtuous, and even threatened the life of the king, is himself 
370 
AYODHYA KANDA 
destroyed ! O Brother, art thou attended by such persons ? 
Has a commander-in-chief who is active, victorious over his 
enemies, skilled in arms, patient in adversity, devoted to thee 
and experienced, been appointed by thee ? Hast thou honoured 
with suitable rewards, those men who are valiant, distinguished, 
eminent in military sciences, resourceful and whose abilities 
have been tested? Dost thou distribute remuneration and 
provisions in a fitting manner when they are due ? Servants 
who are not paid at the proper season, become incensed and 
disregard their master. Dissatisfied retainers are a source of 
danger. 
"Are the liege warriors and chieftains devoted to thee ? In 
time of need, are they ready to lay down their lives for thy sake ? 
Hast thou appointed, as thine ambassadors, those who are citizens 
of thy kingdom, who can divine the motives of others, who are 
of sound judgment, eloquent, and able to overcome their 
opponents in debate? Dost thou employ three spies, each 
unacquainted with the other to master the secrets of the fifteen,1 
excluding thy ministers, priests and the heir-apparent ? Dost 
thou set a watch over enemies whom thou hast driven from 
thy kingdom and yet who have returned ? Dost thou deem 
them harmless ? Art thou attended by brahmins of atheistic 
opinions? Such persons deem themselves wise but, in fact, 
are fools, yet they may divert others from the path of virtue, 
being skilled in dispatching souls to the lower regions. They 
do not study the authorised treatises on the duties of men, 
but indulge in arguments against the Veda and becoming 
eminent in useless knowledge, discuss unworthy matters con tinually. 
" O Friend, dost thou carefully preserve the capital Ayodhya, 
the seat of our ancestors and great men, justly termed 'Invincible' 
having strong gates and being filled with elephants, horses 
and chariots, where brahmins engaged in spiritual duties dwell, 
also warriors and merchants, and superior men who have 
subdued their senses and are intent on various enterprises; 
that progressive city which is replete with temples of many 
1 The fifteen are : chamberlains, adjutants, treasurers, master of the rolls, 
commanders-in-chief, police chiefs, lawyers, magistrates, keepers of the forests 
and mountains, almoners, gaolers, doorkeepers, superintendents of public works, 
priests and paymasters. 
37' 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
forms, frequented by learned men. O Brother, ours is a capital 
which has been the site of many great sacrifices, which contains 
innumerable temples and lakes, frequented by cheerful men 
and women, where festive assemblies are held, where no 
portion of the earth is uncultivated, where elephants, horses 
and cattle dwell in large numbers, where no one lives in jeopardy, 
and which is irrigated by artificial means so that people need 
not depend solely on rain ; which is delightful and where no 
dangerous beasts like lions abound, which is free from wicked 
men, which improves daily and which is protected by the spirits 
of our ancestors, tell me is that city prosperous ? O Brother, 
art thou satisfied with the husbandmen and those who live by 
tending their cattle ? Dost thou provide what they need and 
preserve them from harm ? Dost thou ever guard them and 
provide them with sustenance ? O Brother, a king should ever 
protect his subjects by righteous means. Dost thou propitiate 
the women of thy realm ? Are they duly safeguarded by thee ? 
Dost thou put thy confidence in them ? Dost thou communicate 
thy secrets to them ? O Prince, dost thou, well adorned, show 
thyself to thy people in the assembly hall 'ere noon ? Do those 
who work for thee approach thee with assurance, or do they 
hold back on account of fear ? Both these states are unprofit able. Dost thou treat thy subjects with moderation ? Are thy 
forts well supplied with wealth, food, arms, water, armaments, 
and furnished with archers and bowmen ? O Prince, does thy 
treasury contain more than is needed for thine expenditure ? 
Is thy wealth spent unprofitably on musicians and dancers ? 
Is a part of thy treasure devoted to the gods, thy sisters, the 
brahmins, the uninvited guests, warriors and friends ? Dost 
thou condemn any through avarice, without regard for justice 
or subjecting the offender to closer examination by those 
eminent in law and who are of good conduct ? Are those who 
serve thee, just men, innocent of lying and theft, and not of 
iU-repute ? O Noble One, those who are apprehended for theft, 
caught in the act and their guilt established on due examination, 
are they able to obtain release by bribing the officials? In 
a dispute between a rich and a poor man, do thy experienced 
judges carry out justice uninfluenced by a desire for gain ? O 
Prince of Raghu, the tears of those who are unjustly condemned 
372 
AYODHYA KANDA 
by a monarch who lives at ease and is indifferent to justice 
being meted out, destroy his children and his herds ! O Prince, 
dost thou satisfy the aged, children and physicians by providing 
them with their needs, treating them with affection and granting 
them the benefits of wise administration ? Dost thou offer 
salutations on meeting thy Guru or the aged, the ascetics, 
strangers, sacred objects, and the brahmins who are learned 
and enlightened? Dost thou use the time reserved for the 
performance of thy duty, for the acquisition of wealth, or 
dost thou waste the opportunity of fulfilling thy duty and 
acquiring wealth by partiality to comfort and dissipation ? O 
Chief of Conquerors, O Knower of the significance of time, 
dost thou divide thine hours between the observance of thy duty, 
the acquisition of wealth and legitimate diversion ? O Wise 
One, do the learned pundits and the citizens pray daily for thy 
welfare ? O Bharata, dost thou abjure the fourteen failings a 
sovereign must eschew? Atheism, dissimulation, anger, in attention, procrastination, neglect of the wise, indolence, 
surrender of the senses to external objects, disregard of counsel, 
consulting those who advocate evil, the deferring of that which 
has been resolved upon, the concealment of counsel received, 
the abandoning of righteous conduct, the offering of respect 
equally to the low and high born, and the ruthless conquest of 
other lands. 
" O King, art thou acquainted with the results of the following 
and dost thou constantly reflect on them ? Hunting, gambling, 
sleeping during the day, slander, inordinate affection, vanity, 
concentration on dancing and music, lounging here and there 
to no purpose ; the five fortifications ; by moat, by high banks, 
by thickly planted trees, by waste land destitute of means 
of subsistence and by a waterless region ; the four means to 
success ; concluding peace, liberality, punishment and sowing 
dissension in the ranks of the enemy ; the seven requisites of 
administration : the king, the ministers, government, treasury, 
territory, army and allies. The kinds of persons with whom 
one should not contract friendship ; those who speak ill of others, 
the bold, the curious, the injurious, those who take other's 
property, the abusive, the ruthless, and the eight objects which 
should be pursued; righteousness, acquisition of legitimate 
373 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALM1KI 
wealth, suitable diversions, the study of the three Vedas, treaty, 
stratagem, invasion, proper timing, and allying oneself with 
the powerful ? 
"Art thou acquainted with the five kinds of suffering caused 
by celestial beings ; by fire, water, disease, famine and plague ? 
Hast thou carefully considered the misfortunes occasioned 
by officials, thieves, enemies and the king's favourites ? Dost 
thou reflect that it is not proper to be intimate with a child, 
one who is senile, one who has long been afflicted, one who 
has been excommunicated, a coward, a terrorist, one who is 
avaricious or who excites covetousness, one who is despised 
by others, one who is voluptuous, one who consults everybody, 
one who speaks ill of the brahmins, one who ascribes all to 
fate, or who is afflicted by famine, or who wanders from 
country to country without a purpose, one who has many 
adversaries, one who does not act at the proper season, one 
who is not devoted to truth, one who lives under foreign 
domination and one who is aggressive ? Hast thou given the 
following due consideration and found them to be in accord 
with thee: thy subjects, women, the kingdom, those who 
have lost their wealth, thine enemy, thy friend, those un friendly to thine enemy ? 
" O Wise One, art thou acquainted with the preparations 
necessary for a journey, the methods of punishment, the drawing 
up of treaties, and who is to be trusted or distrusted ? O Prince, 
dost thou enter into consultation with thy counsellors collectively 
or separately, and dost thou treat each interview as private ? 
Dost thou conclude thy study of the Veda with charitable gifts ? 
Dost thou employ thy wealth in distribution of alms and legiti mate diversions ? Do thy marriages become fruitful of progeny ? 
Dost thou practise what thou hast learned from the scriptures ? 
Dost thou approve of acts of benevolence, duty, and worship 
and regard them as productive of fame and longevity? O 
Prince, dost thou follow the path of thy predecessors, which 
promotes happiness and which all applaud ? O Bharata, dost 
thou partake of delicious dishes by thyself? When amongst 
thy companions, dost thou first present them with succulent 
food and then partake of it thyself? Know, O Brother, that 
monarch who is acquainted with the law and also knows how 
374 
AYODHYA KANDA 
to administer justice and rules by righteous means, becomes 
Lord of the earth and enters heaven on his death." 
CHAPTER IOI 
Shri Rama hears the account of his father's death 
Bhakata, hearing these words of Rama, replied : " What will 
the discharge of royal duties avail me, who am destitute of all 
virtue ? O Great One, according to the tradition of our line, 
the younger brother may not be king while the elder lives, 
therefore, O Raghava, return with me to the auspicious city 
of Ayodhya and for the sake of our family, cause thyself to be 
installed as king. Some may consider the king a man, but I 
hold him to be a god, since his conduct differs from others, 
being inspired by duty and divine grace. When I was at the 
home of my maternal uncle and thou exiled to the forest, King 
Dasaratha, adored by the good, the performer of spiritual 
sacrifices, departed to heaven. As soon as thou, with Sita and 
Lakshmana, hadst left the capital, the king overwhelmed by 
sorrow and affliction, passed away. O Chief of Men, offer 
the traditional libations for thy father ; Snatrughna and I have 
already carried out this ritual O Prince, it is said that the 
water and rice offered by a beloved son, grants imperishable 
bliss to one departed. O Raghava, thou wast indeed the beloved 
of thy royal father ; through grief on thy account and the desire 
to see thee, thy sire, his mind unceasingly fixed on thee, 
overcome by sorrow, departed to heaven." 
375 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 102 
They are all afflicted with grief 
On hearing the account of his father's death, from his brother, 
Shri Rama fell unconscious. 
Bharata's words proved as dreadful to Shri Rama, as the 
mace of Indra falling on the danavas in battle. Wringing his 
hands, Raghava fell to the earth like a tree severed by an axe. 
The Lord of the World, Shri Rama, fallen on the earth, lay 
like an elephant which, having borne away the river bank, 
sinks under the load. His two brothers together with Sita, 
perceiving him to have fallen in a swoon, sprinkled him with 
water in order to restore him. 
Recovering somewhat, Shri Rama began to lament. The 
virtuous prince, conscious that his sire had passed away, uttered 
these pious words to Bharata : " What should I do in Ayodhya 
now my father has departed to heaven ? Who can preserve 
the capital bereft of this illustrious monarch ? What can I, 
worthless and wretched, do for that magnanimous one, my 
father, who died through grief at my separation and whose 
funeral rites I was not able to perform ? O Sinless Bharata, 
thou indeed art blessed, by whom the last rites of thy warrior 
parent were performed. Now when I return to the capital 
after completing the term of my exile, none will instruct me 
in what is good and what is evil. Formerly, in affection, my 
father being pleased with my good conduct, enlightened me. 
Who will now utter those words which fell pleasingly on my ears ? " 
Turning his face towards Sita whose countenance resembled 
the full moon, Rama thus addressed her : " O Sita, thy father in-law has left this life, O Lakshmana, thou art fatherless 1 
Bharata has related this bitter news to us. O Lakshmana, 
bring the pulp of the Ingudt fruit and change this apparel 
of bark. I desire to offer libations of water to my royal sire. 
Let Sita precede me and thou follow her ; on such occasions, 
this procedure must be observed."1 Then Sumantra, the aged 
1 When they descend into the water the order of the procession is that the 
children go first according to age, then the women, then the men, the youngest 
first, the eldest last. The order is reversed when they emerge. 
37« 
AYODHYA KANDA 
retainer of the royal line, wise, intelligent, tender-hearted, 
self-subdued, and humble, wholly devoted to Rama, comforted 
the princes and led them to the river Mandakini whose waters 
were sacred and meritorious. 
Deeply afflicted, the illustrious ones approached the pleasant 
river that passed through blossoming woods, and descending 
into the pure, swift-flowing and un-muddied stream, they offered 
the ritual water in the name of their royal father, saying : " O 
Great King, may this water be thine." Then Shri Rama, filling 
his palms with water, turning to the south, wept and said : 
" O Mighty King, may this sacred water offered to-day by me, 
be thine for ever in the region of thine ancestors." 
Thereafter, Raghava with his brothers offered balls of rice 
in memory of the king on the shores of the river Mandakini. 
Having made a cake by mixing the juice of berries with the pulp 
of the Ingudi fruit, Shri Rama spread it on kusha grass and 
deeply afflicted, weeping, said : " O Mighty King, be pleased 
to accept and partake of this food, for that which is man's 
customary food, the gods approve." 
Then ascending the hillside, Shri Rama returned by the way 
he had come. The great Raghava, reaching the door of the 
thatched hut, took hold of the hands of Lakshmana and Bharata, 
and wept. The sound of the weeping of the four princes and 
Sita re-echoed in the mountains like the roaring of a lion, and 
the army hearing it were greatly perturbed and said among 
themselves, " Shri Rama and Bharata have met and they are 
bewailing the death of the king, their sire." 
Leaving their camp and turning their faces to where the sound 
of weeping arose, they went in haste to that spot. Some mounted 
horses and elephants, some rode in gilded chariots, and others 
on foot hastened towards that place, for though Shri Rama 
had but lately left the capital, it appeared to them as if he 
had been long absent from them. Desirous of seeing Rama, 
they proceeded to the hermitage of the illustrious prince in 
various kinds of vehicles and the sound of their advance and 
the rolling wheels created a noise like thunder. Elephants 
terrified by the tumult ran with their mates into other woods, 
perfuming the forest with their ichor. Boars, wolves, buffaloes, 
snakes, tigers, wild cattle and deer of many kinds were filled 
377 
THE RAMAYAKA OF VALMIKI 
with fear. Ducks, waterfowl, swans, geese, cuckoos and herons 
fled in every direction. The air was filled with birds, and the 
earth with men, rendering both beautiful. 
At length, the army reached the place where they perceived 
the illustrious and innocent Rama, tile chief of men, seated on 
the sacrificial seat, and seeing his condition they began to curse 
Kaikeyi and Manthara and, approaching closer, wept bitterly. 
Shri Rama, observing them so afflicted, embraced them like 
a parent. Embracing those who were worthy of his affection, 
offering salutations to some, he treated those of his age and his 
relatives with the respect due to each. 
The voice of their weeping filled the earth and sky, and 
reverberated in the caves and in every quarter like the beat 
of a drum. 
CHAPTER 103 
Shri Rama greets the queens 
Shri Vasishtha, preceded by the widowed queens of King 
Dasaratha, proceeding towards Shri Rama's hermitage, beheld 
the slow-moving Mandakini and the holy place frequented by 
Rama. Afflicted with grief, Queen Kaushalya wept and then 
said to Sumitra and the other Queens : " O see ! here is the 
place where the defenceless Rama, Lakshmana and Sita, deprived 
by Kaikeyi of their kingdom, come to bathe. O Sumitra, 
here meseems thy son Lakshmana unwearyingly brings water 
for my son. Though engaged in this menial service, a kind office 
performed for an elder brother is an honourable act ! Though 
the carrying of water is a humble occupation, when Shri Rama chandra, persuaded by Bharata, returns to the capital) then thy 
son, worthy of every comfort, will abandon these laborious 
duties." 
Queen Kaushalya of large eyes, now perceived the funeral cake 
offered by Shri Rama in memory of his father. She beheld 
how the sorrow-stricken Rama had laid the flour ball on the 
ground in Ins great sire's remembrance, and she then addressed 
378 
AYODHYA KANDA 
the widows of the departed king, saying : " See how this 
has been offered by Raghava in memory of the great king of 
the House of Ikshwaku. I do not consider this flour ball 
mixed with the juice of the Ingudi fruit to be worthy of the 
Mahatma Dasaratha, who was equal to a god ! How should 
the sovereign of the earth enclosed between the four seas, find 
this cake of Ingudi pulp acceptable ? Nothing is more painful 
to me than this, that the illustrious Rama should offer this 
paltry flour ball to his deceased father ! Why does my heart 
not break into a thousand fragments, seeing this poor offering ? 
It is a common saying among men that the food eaten by a man 
is the food of his god and his ancestors. " 
The consorts of the king consoled the chief queen and 
proceeding onwards, reached the hermitage where they beheld 
Shri Rama seated like a god descended from heaven. Seeing 
Shri Rama withdrawn from every pleasure, they were deeply 
distressed and wept bitterly. 
Shri Rama, the Devotee of Truth, rose up and touched the 
feet of his mothers, and the large-eyed queens with their tender 
hands took tht dust from his feet. Shri Lakshmana, distressed 
to see their grief, offered salutations to them with deep affection 
and they, wiping the dust from the feet of Shri Rama, 
manifested the same love to Prince Lakshmana, since he, too, 
was the son of King Dasaratha. Sita also, full of grief, her eyes 
suffused with tears, stood before the queens touching their feet. 
Kaushalya, embracing Shri Sita who was emaciated through 
the privations of her exile, addressed her as a mother her 
daughter and said : "Alas ! Alas ! the daughter of King 
Videha, the daughter-in-law of King Dasaratha, and the consort 
of Shri Ramachandra, has undergone great privations in the 
forest. O Janaki, I bum with the fire of grief when I behold 
thy countenance scorched by the sun like the faded crimson 
water lilies, or gold denied with dust, or the moon obscured 
by clouds. I am being consumed by the pain arising from this, 
like a piece of wood1 slowly consumed by fire." 
While Queen Kaushalya was thus lamenting, Shri Rama chandra approached the Holy Vasishtha and touched his lotus 
1 Videha is the name given to the two pieces of wood from which a fire is 
kindled. There is, therefore, a play on the name of Sita, here. 
379 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
feet. Having touched the feet of the great ascetic, who was 
as resplendent as fire, like Indra offering salutations to the feet 
of Brihaspati, Shri Rama sat down near him. 
Then the pious Bharata accompanied by his counsellors, the 
chief people of the city, and his generals, approached Shri Rama 
and occupied a lower seat. 
The heroic Bharata, with joined palms, seated by his elder 
brother who was attired in ascetic's garb, appeared like Frajapati 
seated before Brahma ! At that moment, the principal citizens 
present were rilled with curiosity to know what Shri Bharata 
would say to Raghava. The ever-truthful and valiant Rama, 
seated with Bharata and Lakshmana, together resembled three 
ritual fires in the place of sacrifice. 
CHAPTER IO4 
He requests Prince Bharata to ascend the throne 
Shri Rama, together with Lakshmana, addressed Shri Bharata, 
saying : " O Bharata, say why thou art come hither to the forest 
in ascetic's garb, clothed in bark and deerskin? For what 
purpose, O Prince, hast thou, abandoning thy throne, come to 
the forest, attired in the skin of the antelope ? " 
Thus questioned, Shri Bharata controlling his grief, answered : 
" O Noble Sire, my father, the king, by my mother acting in 
an improper manner, has died of grief through separation from 
his son. O Mighty Prince, my mother has done an exceedingly 
evil deed and forfeited her fair name. Widowed and over whelmed with affliction, she will fall into hell. Though the son 
of Kaikeyi, yet am I thy servant. Be gracious to me and allow 
thyself to be installed to-day and ascend the throne like Indra. 
The elders of the people and my widowed mother have come 
hither to entreat thee. Be pleased to grant our request, 0 
Lord. 
" Q Thou who payest due deference to all men, being the 
eldest son of the king, shouldst by right occupy the throne. 
380 
AYODHYA KANDA 
Accept the burden of kingship and gratify the desire of thy 
friends. The earth, obtaining thee as her Lord, will rest satisfied 
as the winter night in the presence of the moon. Not only 
am I thy brother, but thy devoted follower and servant. I 
and my ministers salute thee and beg of thee to look with favour 
on our request 
" O Chief of Men, let not these counsellors and those who 
have traditionally held office, plead in vain." 
Having spoken, Prince Bharata, his eyes suffused with tears, 
placed his head at the feet of Shri Rama. Shri Rama lifting 
him up embraced Prince Bharata who was sighing like one 
distraught, and said : " O Bharata, why should a virtuous and 
enlightened prince such as thou, act so that his elder brother 
commit sin ? O Hero, I see no fault in thee, but it behoves 
thee not to speak ill of thy mother. O Sinless One, the father 
or the spiritual preceptor can order his disciple, his servant 
or his wife as he will. Therefore, it must be known to thee, 
that a wise son or devotee should ever manifest obedience. 
I am, therefore, submissive to my sire. 
" O Lovely One, we are subject to the king and it is one 
if he send us to the forest, to the abode of ascetics, or retain us 
in his proximity. O Chief of the Virtuous, a mother should 
be revered even as the father. O Bharata, by the command 
of my pious mother and father, I was sent to the forest, how 
should I dare to disobey them ? 
"Do thou, O Prince, return to the capital and acclaimed 
by the people, ascend the throne, while I reside in the forest 
as an ascetic. Remember, thus did the king resolve in the 
presence of his people and now he has departed. The sovereign 
is the instructor of his people and of thee also, and it was meet 
he should do as he has done. O Bharata, do thou enjoy the 
kingdom given thee by my father. 
" O Beautiful One, I shall remain in the Dandaka forest for 
fourteen years and enjoy what my father has conferred on me. 
The illustrious monarch, my sire, honoured by the whole world, 
has commanded me to come to the forest and to obey him 
is my happiness. 
" Meseems the sovereignty of the whole world is vain if it 
be mine in defiance of my father's command." 
381 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 105 
Prince Bharata appeals to Shri Rama to return and rule 
the kingdom 
The princes surrounded by relatives and friends passed the night 
sorrowing. The day having dawned, the brothers observed 
the fire sacrifice and performed the repetition of silent prayer 
on the banks of the river Mandakini, then entering the hermitage 
of Rama, they sat in profound silence, no one uttering a word, 
a great peace prevailing over all. 
At length, Shri Bharata, in the midst of his friends, broke 
the silence and thus addressed Shri Rama : " O My Brother, 
our illustrious sovereign conferred the kingdom on me to satisfy 
my mother and fulfil the obligation of his former boons and 
my mother having given this kingdom to me, I now offer it 
to thee, enjoy it without hindrance. When the dam bursts in 
the rainy season, none can stem the tide, similarly none but thee 
can protect this vast dominion. O King, as an ass cannot equal 
the pace of a horse, nor an ordinary bird's flight that of an eagle, 
so am I unable to rule the kingdom without thee. 
" O Rama, happy is the sovereign on whom others depend, 
but wretched is the one who depends on others. A tree 
planted and watered, though it grow and spread forth great 
branches that no dwarf can scale, and be covered with blossom, 
if it bear no fruit, the one who planted it suffers obloquy. O 
Mighty Hero, let this metaphor be understood by thee, that 
thou, being the Lord of all, mayst guide thy servants. O 
Lord, let us behold thee, the destroyer of thy foes, seated on 
the royal throne, shining resplendent like the sun. May these 
mighty tuskers follow thy chariot and all the queens dwelling 
in the palace rejoice." 
The people hearing Shri Bharata's words applauded them 
saying, " Well said ! " " Well said ! " 
Then the compassionate Rama perceiving Bharata afflicted 
and lamenting, consoled him saying : " 0 Bharata, man is not 
free, time1 drags him hither and thither. All objects perish, all 
individualised souls must depart when their merit is exhausted ; 
1 Time is the form of destiny. 
382 
AYODHYA KANDA 
sons, friends, wives, all who live must die one day. Hoarding 
and spending, prosperity and destitution, meeting and partings 
life and death are all akin. When the ripe fruit falls, we are 
not surprised, thus a man being born should not fear when 
death claims him. 
"As a building supported by stout pillars on becoming old, 
falls into ruins, so man subject to age, must one day meet with 
dissolution. O Bharata, the night once past, does not come 
again ; so the waters of the Yamuna, flowing to the sea, do 
not return. See ! the days and nights are passing away, 
decreasing the period of our life's span, as the rays of the sun 
in summer suck up the earth's moisture. O Prince, grieve for 
thyself therefore, there is nought else worthy of grief ! Age 
withers all whether movable or immovable. Death is ever at 
our side, nor does it leave us when we travel to a distant place, 
and it is still present at our returning ! 
" What shall a man do when his skin is wrinkled and grey hair 
covers his head and he is stricken in years ? Man rejoices when 
the sun rises and sets, heedless of the waning of his powers. 
He welcomes the approach of each season, such as the arrival 
of spring, yet the succession of the seasons devours man's days ! 
As pieces of driftwood, floating on the sea, come together for 
a space, so wives, sons, relatives, wealth and property remain 
with us a while, but in the course of time, leave us. 
" One, sitting by the wayside, cries to a group of travellers 
passing by, * Let me also go with you ! * why then should man 
grieve to tread the road, which has been trodden by his 
predecessors ? The life of man, like a river flowing, does not 
return, thus our days diminish and we should perform those 
righteous acts that bring us to the knowledge of Reality. 
" Practising virtue, man should enjoy worldly pleasures ; our 
rather, the illustrious Dasaratha, having performed benevolent 
deeds and given fitting charitable gifts, has departed, clothed 
in virtue. Having cherished his servants and nourished his 
people, having levied those taxes alone warranted by moral duty, 
having set up water tanks and created reservoirs and performed 
many sacrificial acts, he has passed away. Leaving the world 
after enjoying a variety of pleasures and offering countless 
sacrifices, the king, at a great age, has gone to heaven. 
383 2C 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
" O Brother, it is not meet to grieve for the king, who, full 
of years, having enjoyed the pleasures of the world, respected 
by the good, has given up his life. Having abandoned his 
worn-out frame, he has obtained the form of a celestial being. 
"A wise, learned and enlightened man like thee, should not 
grieve for such a sire. Exercising patience, thou shouldst cease 
to lament and giving up sorrow return to the capital. O Chief 
among the Eloquent, thy father has commanded thee to dwell 
in Ayodhya. I too will perform the behests of him who ever 
practised righteousness ! 
" I cannot disregard the commands of my illustrious father, 
he is worthy to be obeyed by thee and me, being our parent 
and our ruler. O Son of Raghu, I shall, therefore, obey his will 
and dwell in the forest O Chief of Men, those who desire 
felicity in a future state, and who are virtuous and benevolent 
should obey their elders. O Great One, bear in mind the 
behests of our father, a lover of truth, and return to the capital 
to rule over the kingdom ! " 
The magnanimous Rama, having uttered these sage words 
relative to the need for obedience to his father, became silent. 
CHAPTER 106 
In spite of the entreaties exhorting him to return, Shri Rama 
remains steadfast in his vow 
Rama, the lover of his people, having spoken, ceased ; then 
the pious Bharata answered Rama, putting forth persuasive 
arguments of righteous purport, saying : " O Lord, who is there 
in this world like thee ? Adversity does not move thee, nor 
does any agreeable thing touch thee. All look on thee as their 
superior, yet thou seekest counsel of thine elders ! 
" The man to whom the living and dead are one and who 
is indifferent as to what he possesses or loses, for what reason 
should he grieve ? O Lord, those who like thee, know, as thou 
dost, what is the nature of the soul and its essence, are not 
moved in the hour of distress ! 
384 
AYODHYA KANDA 
" O Prince of Raghu, like the gods, thou art magnanimous, 
thou art ever forbearing and faithful to thy vows. Thou art 
wise, thou knowest and seest all ! Thou art aware of the 
motives of men's actions and the cause of their abandoning 
them, therefore, that distress which is insupportable to others, 
does not, in any wise, disturb thee." 
Having spoken thus, Bharata continued : '* O Rama, be 
gracious to me, though during my absence in a strange land, 
my mother committed those sins which cause my affliction. 
I am bound by the ties of duty, else would I have slain my 
wicked mother. What is evil and what is good is known to me, 
descended as I am from the righteous King Dasaratha, therefore 
I am unable to act contrary to virtue. I cannot speak evil in 
the assembly of my pious and aged rather, who has passed away, 
and where is a man to be found so wholly acquainted with 
the law of righteousness as was the king, yet what person 
familiar with the moral law, would commit so great a wrong 
prompted by the desire to please a woman ? There is an ancient 
saving that, at the approach of death, man loses the power 
of judgment ! The king has verily justified this adage to the 
whole world ! Through fear of Queen Kaikeyi's wrath or her 
threat of self-imposed destruction, or through mental agitation, 
the king may have acted thus without consulting his subjects, 
but thou art not bound by such a deed. He who imputes 
the transgressions of his father to righteous motives is not 
considered a good son ; as heir to the king, reveal not the errors 
of thy sire, but conceal this unjust deed from the world. 
" O Hero, it is thy duty to save my mother Kaikeyi, my father, 
my relatives and myself from the consequences of this action 
condemned by all. O Brother, remember thy duty as a warrior 
and reflect on the outcome of thy sojourn in the forest as an 
ascetic, but do thou also consider the good of thy people. It 
becomes thee not to undertake this course of action. The first 
duty of a warrior is to be installed so that he may be able to 
protect his people. Say, why should a man giving up that which 
is an established duty, embrace that which is wretched, cheerless, 
visionary and undefined? If, O Blessed One, thou desirest 
to undertake this mortification, why dost thou not seek it through 
the arduous labour of ruling the four castes ? It is said that 
3«5 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
the duty of the householder is the highest dharma, then, why 
dost thou abandon it ? 
" O Lord, hear me ; I am but thy child in respect of learning, 
age and state, how should I be able to govern the kingdom ? 
I, a child, void of understanding and virtue and in rank 
also thine inferior ; how should I be able to live without thee 
much less rule in thy stead ? Therefore, O Raghava, O Thou 
Virtuous One, do thou, with thy relatives govern the kingdom 
without opposition and acquire merit ! The great sage, the 
Holy Vasishtha, is here present with the ministers and priests, 
permit thyself to be crowned and return with us to Ayodhya ! 
"As Indra, having conquered his foes, entered heaven attended 
by the Maruts, do thou enter Ayodhya, thereby discharging 
thy duties to the gods, the sages, and thine ancestors, gratifying 
the ambitions of thy friends ! Regard me as thy servant and 
command me ! O Noble One, let thy friends to-day rejoice 
at thine enthronement and let the evil doers flee to the uttermost 
ends of the earth ! O Chief of Men, wash away the taint of 
my mother's guilt and deliver our great parent from this heinous 
sin. With my head bent in submission, I entreat thee ; as Shri 
Vishnu shows his compassion to all beings, do thou show mercy 
to us. Shouldst thou however reject my prayer and go hence to 
some other forest, then will I follow thee there ! " 
Shri Rama, thus entreated by Shri Bharata, who had placed 
his head at the feet of his brother in humility, still remained 
steadfast in his vow and did not waver or consent to return 
to Ayodhya. Beholding the constancy of Shri Rama, all present 
rejoiced to see him so faithful to his vow, yet bewailed his 
determination not to return to the capital. 
The merchants, the learned brahmins and the priests filled 
with wonder, and the weeping matrons, praised Bharata and 
unitedly entreated Rama to return. 
386 
AYODHYA KANDA 
CHAPTER 107 
He instructs Prince Bharata to return and be installed 
Shri Rama, worshipped by Bharata, who sought to petition 
him further, replied to his younger brother in the presence 
of the other warriors, saying : " O Bharata, Son of Queen 
Kaikeyi, and the mighty Dasaratha, what thou hast said is meet 
and right. In ancient times when King Dasaratha, our sire, 
sought thy mother, Princess Kaikeyi, in marriage, he promised 
her father that he would be succeeded by a son of hers. 
Furthermore, in the war between the gods and asuras, our 
sovereign made the promise of two boons to thy mother in 
return for her great services, in consequence of which thy 
illustrious and charming mother asked two favours of the king, 
holding him to his word. 
" O Lion among Men ! By one boon was my exile secured 
and by the other the kingdom was obtained for thee. O Chief 
of men, as a result of the boon granted by my father, I have 
consented to live in the forest for fourteen years. 
" Determined to prove the truth of my lather's word, I have 
entered the forest with Sita and Lakshmana, regardless of heat 
and cold. O Great Ruler, it becomes thee also to prove thy 
father to be a votary of truth and allow thyself to be speedily 
installed. O Bharata, honour this debt, thou owest it to the 
king, and thus protect his fair name. By occupying the throne, 
shalt thou succeed in pleasing me and rejoicing thy mother, 
Queen Kaikeyi. 
" O Friend, I have heard that formerly a great monarch 
named Gaya, when offering a sacrifice at Gaya, to the spirit 
of his ancestors, said : 'A son is called " Puttra " because he 
saves his father from hell and protects the spirits of his ancestors 
by enjoined acts of benevolence. * 
" To have many learned and virtuous sons is greatly to be 
desired, for some of them may offer a sacrifice at Gaya and thus 
deliver the spirits of their ancestors. 
" O Son of Raghu, all the royal sages have approved this tenet, 
thou shouldst also, therefore, accept it O Bharata* do thou 
387 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
return to Ayodhya with Shatrughna and thy people and promote 
the happiness of thy subjects there. 
" O King, I shall speedily retire to the Dandaka forest with 
Sita and Lakshmana. O Bbarata, be thou king of men and I 
will be sovereign over the wild beasts. Do thou return joyfully 
to the capital and I will cheerfully proceed to the forest. 
" May the royal canopy protect thee from the sun's heat, 
I shall seek shelter from its rays in the dense shadows of the 
trees. O Bharata, Shatrughna of limitless understanding shall 
attend thee, and I shall be attended by the illustrious Prince 
Lakshmana. O Brother, do not be a prey to grief any longer, 
thus shall we, the four sons of the great King Dasaratha, establish 
his fame in the realm of truth." 
CHAPTER 108 
A brahmin utters words contrary to dharma 
As Shri Rama thus instructed Bharata, a brahmin named Javali 
uttered these words contrary to dharma : " Well-spoken, O 
Raghava, but it is not for thee to think as common men, for 
thou art a man of understanding and also a philosopher. 
Consider well, O Prince, a man has neither a real friend nor 
an enemy, he enters the world alone and leaves it alone also. 
He who thinks * This is my father ' or ' This is my mother ' 
and becomes attached to this relationship is without sense. 
From the standpoint of right reasoning, none belongs to any. 
As a man travelling from his own village to another, remains 
for the night somewhere on the way and leaves at dawn, so 
father, mother, wealth and family remain with a man for a 
brief space and the wise do not become attached to them. 
" O Chief of Men, thou dost not, being youthful, merit the 
path of suffering set with thorns ; it ill becomes thee to abandon 
thy father's kingdom. Return to Ayodhya and rule over that 
prosperous land. The goddess protecting Ayodhya, devoted 
to thee, awaits thy return. O Prince, enjoy those chosen 
388 
AYODHYA KANDA 
pleasures which befit a king and divert thyself in the capital 
as Indta in Amaravati. Dasaratha is nought to thee nor thou 
to him, the king is one person and thou another, therefore, 
follow u^e advice I give thee. 
" The father's seed is but the remote cause of man's birth, 
since if it does not enter the mother's womb, it cannot fructify ; 
the true source of conception is the womb of the mother. The 
king has departed to the place destined for all mortals. Why 
dost thou claim this false relationship and distress thyself in 
vain, O Rama ? I grieve for those who, abandoning the 
pleasures of the world, seek to acquire merit for felicity hereafter 
and sink to an untimely death, I do not grieve for others. Men 
waste food and other precious things by offering them up yearly, 
as sacrifices in honour of their departed ancestors. O Rama, 
has a dead man ever partaken of food ? If food that is eaten 
by one, nourishes another, then those who journey need never 
carry provision on the way. Relatives might feed a brahmin, 
in his name, at home ! 
" O Ramachandra, these scriptural injunctions were laid down 
by learned men, skilled in inducing others to give, and finding 
other means of obtaining wealth, thus subjugating the simple minded. Their doctrine is * Sacrifice, give in charity, consecrate 
yourselves, undergo austerities and become ascetics '. O Rama, 
be wise, there exists no world but this, that is certain ! Enjoy 
that which is present and cast behind thee that which is 
unpleasant ! Adopting the principle acceptable to all, do thou 
receive the kingdom offered thee by Bharata." 
CHAPTER 109 
Shri Rama replies in words based on the Vedas 
Shri Rama, patiently giving ear to the utterance of Javali, replied 
with a due sense of judgment and in words based on his belief 
that those duties enjoined in the Vedas, should be fulfilled. 
"O Muni, that which thou hast spoken with the desire to 
389 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
please me, is not authorized, nor are thy admonitions just, since, 
even the most cursory analysis proves them to be false. O Sage, 
in the assembly of the good, men who are not self-subdued 
and who are wanting in integrity and those who act contrary 
to what is ordered by the scriptures, are not honoured. It is 
his conduct that renders man virtuous, a coward or a hero and 
transmutes impurity to purity. Should I embrace error and 
abandon the authority of my elders, relinquishing rectitude 
and honour, as also moral conduct and the Vedic ordinance, 
then I, conforming to thy beliefs and sacrificing prudence, 
would forfeit the respect of wise and virtuous men. 
" Following thy counsel, were I to cease to pursue the way 
of truth and tread the lower path, by what means should X 
attain heaven ? Were I to depart from the moral code, then 
every man might act according to his inclination, since the 
subject mirrors the king, in action. 
"Above all, a sovereign should manifest probity, benevolence, 
his chief duty being to uphold truth; truth is verily the 
kingdom, by truth is the world supported. 
" The gods and sages esteem truth as the highest principle. 
He who utters truth attains the supreme state. Men fear a liar 
as they do a venomous serpent, truth is the root of all felicity 
and the support not only of this world, but the best means 
of attaining heaven ! 
" Whatever is offered in sacrifice, whatever austerity is 
undertaken has its foundation in truth, so the Vedas declare, 
hence truth is the most sacred of all things. 
" One maintains a family, another governs the whole world, 
another falls into hell, another attains heaven in accordance 
with the fruit of his actions I Acquainted with the law of Karma 
founded on truth, ought I not to prove my sire a devotee of 
that truth ? Why should not I, who have pledged my word, 
follow that which I have accepted as truth ? Honouring my 
father's vow, I shall never abandon the way of truth either for 
the sake of governing a kingdom or through being misled by others 
or through ignorance or anger. Hast thou not heard that 
neither the Gods nor the ancestors receive the offerings of one 
who is irresolute, infirm of purpose and false to his word ? 
" I hold truth as the supreme virtue of mankind. I desire 
390 
AYODHYA KANDA 
to reverence that truth upheld by men of old. Should I follow 
the duty of a warrior, I should be unjust. To do that which 
is false is worthy only of mean, covetous and depraved souls. 
Should I pursue that crooked path) indicated by thee, then I 
should perpetrate falsehood, through the mind, the body and 
the soul. Those who uphold truth acquire land, renown, fame, 
and heaven also; therefore, let all men utter truth and act 
according to truth ! 
" That which thou, after much deliberation, believest to be 
true, and recommendest to me is wholly improper. O how 
can I disregard the command of my sire, that I should reside 
in the forest ? When I pledged my word in the presence of 
my father, to enter the forest, Queen Kaikeyi was rendered 
glad at heart, how should I now give her cause for distress ? 
" Giving up falsehood and deceit, differentiating between what 
should and should not be done, subduing the senses, possessed 
of full faith in the Vedic injunctions, I shall devote myself to 
the fulfilment of my father's will ! 
" By sacrifice, one acquires the state of Indra and enters 
heaven. The sages by virtue of sacrifice have gone thither." 
The illustrious and glorious Ramachandra, highly displeased 
by the materialistic arguments of Javali spoke thus in terms 
of refutation and reproof: " O Javali, by speaking the truth, 
by pursuing the duties of their caste and station, by manifesting 
their valour in time of need, by gentle speech, by service of 
their spiritual preceptor, the gods and unexpected guests, men 
attain heaven ' Therefore, those brahmins instructed in truth, 
pursue virtue with a single mind in accordance with their caste 
and station and eagerly await their entrance to Brahmaloka.1 
O Javali, I perceive with regret the action of my illustrious 
parent in permitting one of atheistic ideas, who has fallen from 
the path of rectitude enjoined in the Vedas, to remain in his 
court. Those who preach the heretical doctrine of the Charvaka 
school, are not only infidels, but have deviated from the path 
of truth. It is die duty of a monarch to deal with such persons 
as with felons, nor should men of understanding and learning 
stand in the presence of such atheists. 
" O Javali, those versed in wisdom, who preceded thee, 
1 Brahmaloka— the abode of Shri Brahma, the Creator. 
391 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
performed many holy acts by virtue of which they acquired 
eminence here and in the spiritual realm. Those sages have 
ever practised harmlessness, truth, asceticism, charity, benevo lence and sacrifice. 
" O Javali, those who fulfil their spiritual duty, who are the 
foremost in deeds of charity, and who harm none, who frequent 
the assemblies of the good and are revered by all men, they 
are without sin, their name shall live for ever as that of our 
illustrious Guru, Shri Vasishtha." 
Rama, having uttered these harsh words to Javali, he, with 
humility addressed Rama saying : " O Rama, I am no atheist ; 
on this occasion, I assumed this atheistical disguise in order to 
turn thee from thy purpose and persuade thee to return to the 
capital ! " 
CHAPTER I 10 
Vasishtha proclaiming the tradition of the dynasty, 
calls upon Rama to return 
Perceiving Rama still to be indignant at the speech of Javali, 
the holy Vasishtha said : — 
" O Rama, the Sage Javali is a believer in the transmigration 
of the soul ; he has thus spoken through his desire to persuade 
thee to return to the capital. O Sovereign of Men, hear from 
me concerning the creation of the world. 
" In the beginning, all was water, and from that element 
the earth was formed and after this, Brahma and other gods 
came into existence. The eternal, imperishable Brahma was 
begotten of akasha (ether) and from him came forth Marichi, 
and from him Kashyapa was produced. From Kashyapa was 
born Vivaswat, and the son of Vivaswat was Manu himself, 
who was the first among the Prajapatis. Ikshwaku was the son 
of Manu and to him the whole world was given by Manu, and 
Ikshwaku became the first King of Ayodhya. The son of 
392 
AYODHYA KANDA 
Ikshwaku was named Rukshi and his son was Vikukshi, whose 
son was the resplendent and illustrious King Vana and the 
great warrior Anavanya was his son. During the reign of the 
virtuous King Anavanya there was neither famine nor scarcity 
of rain nor any thief. The son of Anavanya was Prithu and 
his son was Trishanku. So great was Trishanku's observance 
of truth that he attained heaven in his embodied state. His son 
was the mighty Dhundhumara. The son of Dhundhumara 
was Yuvanashwa and his son was Mandhata. The illustrious 
Susandhi was the son of Mandhata and Dhruvasandhi and 
Frasenagita were the offspring of Susandhi. The renowned 
Bharata was the son of Dhruvasandhi and from Bharata sprang 
Ajita, against whom the great kings, Himaya, Talagangha and 
Shashavindu declared war. Ajita laid siege to them by building 
fortifications, but found their defeat beset with difficulties. 
" Resigning his throne, he retired to the delightful Himalayas 
to devote himself to spiritual practices. It is said that one of 
his two queens was pregnant and the other gave her poison 
to destroy the foetus. The Queen Kalindi approached the Sage 
Chyavana, the son of Bhrigu, who resided in the Himalayas 
at that time, and paid him respectful homage. He, gratified, 
knowing her to be desirous of a son, said : * O Goddess, thou 
shalt bring forth a son who will be renowned, virtuous, 
magnanimous, of excellent conduct, a promoter of his race 
and a subduer of bis foes.* 
" The Queen hearing this, saluted the rishi with reverence ; 
she then returned home and brought forth a son, whose eyes 
resembled the lotus and who resembled Brahma in splendour. 
Being born with the poison that her fellow-consort had ad ministered to her, Kalindi's son was named Sagara. 
" Consecrated at a fitting season, King Sagara drained the 
ocean. His son was called Asamanjas, he oppressed the people 
and the king ordered him to be banished on account of his 
evil ways. The son of Asamanjas was Anshuman and his son 
was Dilipa. The son of Dilipa was Bhagiratha. The son of 
Bhagiratha was Kakustha whose son was Raghu from whom 
the royal line has since been named. The sons of Shri Raghu 
were known by the names of Pravriddha, Purushadaka, Kalmasha pada and Soudasa. The son of Kalmashapada was Shankhana 
393 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
who rising to great power, by a curse, was destroyed wth his 
whole army. The mighty hero Sudarshana was the son of 
Shankhana and his son was Agnivama and Agnivarna's son was 
Shighraga. His son was named Meru, and Meru's son was 
Prashusvara, and his son was the great Sage Ambarisha. The 
son of Ambarisha was the truthful Prince Nahusha, whose son 
was the virtuous Nabhaga. Nabhaga had two sons, Aja and 
Suvrata, and the son of Aja was the illustrious sovereign 
Dasaratha. Thou art the son of the great monarch Dasaratha 
renowned all through the world, who reigned over earth and 
heaven. 
" In the dynasty of Ikshwaku, the eldest son succeeds to the 
throne ; while the eldest son lives, none else can become king. 
It is not meet tor thee to violate this sacred tradition of the 
House of Raghu. O Great One, reign over this earth filled 
with treasures and those extensive dominions subject to thee, 
as did thy sire t " 
CHAPTER III 
Prince Bkarata still entreats Shri Rama who is resolved 
to follow his father's command 
Having spoken thus, Shri Vasishtha continued, uttering words 
of wisdom. " O Rama, when a man is born, he must regard 
as his teachers, his father, his mother and bis spiritual preceptor. 
" O Chief of Men, the parents bestow on man the physical 
frame, but the spiritual preceptor confers wisdom on him, and 
hence he is called Guru. 
" I am the preceptor of thy father and of thee, mark my 
counsel and do not over-ride the way of the good. O My Son, 
here are thy relatives, the learned brahmins and the people 
of the capital, as also the warriors and merchants. Fulfil thy 
duty to them and do not exceed the limits of moral obligation. 
" Here is thy pious and aged mother, whom thou shouldst 
not disobey. That man is called virtuous who renders obedience 
to his mother. 
3S>4 
AYODHYA KANDA 
" O Prince, thou shall not have swerved from the path of 
righteous action by acceding to Bharata's request that thou 
shouldst occupy the throne." 
Thus, having addressed Rama with mildness, the holy Guru 
Vasishtha resumed his seat. 
The mighty Rama then made answer, saying : " The good 
that parents do to their son cannot easily be recompensed. 
In childhood, they present him with beautiful attire and 
delectable dishes, they put him to rest and tenderly rub his body 
with oil of sesamum seed and manifest affection in gentle 
counsels ; further they strive single-mindedly for his ultimate 
good. 
" The commands of my sire, the author of my being, shall 
not be set aside." 
The magnanimous Bharata hearing these words of Rama chandra, suffered great distress, and spoke to Sumantra, saying : 
" O Charioteer, prepare a seat of kusha grass on this trestle seat, 
I will place myself before Shri Rama till he be pleased to grant 
my request. Like a brahmin, who is destitute, I will lie at 
the door of this hut, fasting and covering my face, till Shri Rama 
consents to return to the capital." 
Sumantra looking towards Shri Rama, spread the kusha grass, 
and Prince Bharata, full of grief, seated himself there, before 
his brother. 
Perceiving this, Shri Rama, chief of the royal sages, said to 
him : " O Beloved Bharata, what wrong have I done that thou 
shouldst sit thus before me? A brahmin may adopt this 
measure towards his aggressor, but it is not meet that a crowned 
head should do so. O Lion among Men, rise, abandon this 
cruel vow and return speedily to the capital." 
Bharata, afflicted, yet resolute, remaining firm, said to the 
people of the capital and of the country who surrounded him : 
" Why do you not also make entreaty to Shri Rama ? " 
Then they answered saying : " We are unable to press 
Kakustha1 further, since he is resolved to follow his father's 
command." 
Rama hearing their words said to Bharata : " O Prince, 
consider the words of thy companions versed in righteousness 
1 Kakustha — a name of Rama, as descendant of King Ikshwalcu. 
395 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
and weigh the matter carefully. Having reflected on their 
words with attention, arise, O Raghava, and undergo that which 
shall purify thee for having enacted that which does not become 
a warrior. Do thou drink water and touch me also." 
Bharata rising, said : " Hear, O Brahmins, Countrymen and 
Warriors ! I do not desire the kingdom of my father, I did 
not urge my mother to demand it. I knew naught of the exile 
of Shri Rama. If it be required that someone shall dwell in 
the forest in obedience to my father's command, then will I 
reside there for fourteen years in his stead." 
Shri Rama, astonished at his brother's resolution, addressed 
the people present, saying : " Friends, whatever was bought, 
pledged or sold by the king in his lifetime, can by no means 
be cancelled by me or Bharata. Neither can I accept contumely 
and permit Bharata to go as my representative to the forest. 
What Kaikeyi demanded was rightfully granted by the king. 
" I know Bharata to be disinterested and a true disciple of 
his Guru, and that excellent one is a lover of truth. I herewith 
declare that on my return from the forest, I shall accept the 
kingdom and with my virtuous brother govern the country 
with honour. 
" O Bharata, I have discharged the boon granted to Kaikeyi 
by the king and vindicated his honour. Do thou liberate the 
king from the charge of falsehood and redeem the second boon." 
CHAPTER 112 
Following the advice of the celestial sages, Prince Bharata 
is reconciled to becoming Shri Rama's deputy 
The great sages who were present at the meeting of the two 
illustrious brothers, were astonished. The royal sages, those 
perfect ones also celestial beings, who were invisible, praised 
the two princes and said : " Blessed is the king, whose sons 
are highly virtuous and veracious, we are immeasurably gratified 
to hear their converse." 
396 
AYODHYA KANDA 
Desirous that the life and reign of Ravana should end soon, 
certain sages approached Bharata and unitedly addressed him, 
saying : " O Bharata, O Highly Resolute Prince, O Pious and 
Renowned One, recollect that thou art born in a royal line, 
let not the word of Rama be disregarded by thee, if thou art 
wishful to bring felicity to the spirit of thy parent. It is our desire 
that thy father who has entered heaven may be absolved from 
every debt, having discharged his obligations to Queen Kaikeyi." 
Having spoken thus, these celestial sages returned to their 
abode. 
Rama, gratified by their words, said : " By you, have I been 
assisted in upholding virtue." 
Prince Bharata with trembling accents again entreated Rama, 
saying : " O Rama, he who is skilled in righteous governance 
and who is the eldest, ascends the throne. Do thou, observing 
the tradition, fulfil the desire of thy mother Kaushalya. I alone 
have neither the courage to administer so vast a dominion, 
nor should I be able to satisfy the people of the capital and 
kingdom. 
" Our relatives, friends, and warriors await thy conversion 
to sovereignty as the husbandman eagerly anticipates the rain 
clouds. Therefore, O Wise One, accept the crown for thou 
alone art able to establish this kingdom." 
Having spoken thus, Bharata fell at the feet of his brother 
and fervently entreated him, crying : " O Rama, O Rama." 
Shri Rama, raising up the young prince who, eloquent and 
lotus-eyed, resembled a wild swan embraced him, and said : 
*' That genuine humility which thou hast demonstrated will 
furnish thee with sufficient courage to govern the kingdom. 
Do thou consult thy ministers, counsellors and friends in the 
great work of thy rule. The moon may cease from shining, 
and the Himalaya abandon the snows, Mount Meru its splendour 
or the ocean exceed its boundary, but I shall not relinquish 
the vow made in the presence of my sire. O Beloved One, 
it is not for thee to determine whether that which was brought 
about by thy mother was done through love of thee, or through 
ambition to see thee made king, it is for thee to treat her as 
thy parent." 
Then Prince Bharata answered Rama who resembled the sun 
397 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
in glory and the new moon in splendour, saying : " O Noble 
One, place thy feet in these sandals adorned with gold, since 
soon they will furnish our only means of support and protection." 
The illustrious Rama having put on the sandals, took them 
off and returned them to Bharata. He, bowing reverently to 
the sandals addressed Rama thus : " From to-day I shall for 
fourteen years, assuming matted locks and a robe of bark, live 
on fruits and roots, awaiting thy return. Offering up the 
management of the kingdom to these sandals for fourteen years, 
if I do not see thee returning on the final day of that period, 
I will enter the fire and be consumed ! " 
Shri Rama embracing Bharata with great reverence answered 
" Be it so." Then he spoke further saying : " Cherish thy 
mother Kaikeyi, and be not angry with her. In my name and 
in the name of Shri Sita, I adjure thee to reverence and protect 
Queen Kaikeyi ! " His eyes suffused with tears, Shri Rama 
then bade farewell to Shri Bharata and Shatrughna. 
Bharata offering due reverence to the ornate and glittering 
sandals, circumambulated Shri Rama and placed them on the 
head of the mighty elephant belonging to King Dasaratha. 
Then Shri Rama, immoveable like the Himalayas, in the practice 
of virtue and the promoter of the honour of the House of Raghu, 
made obeisance to his holy Guru, the ministers, citizens and 
his brothers, and dismissed them. 
His mothers, overcome with grief, were unable to utter 
a single word. To them also Shri Rama offered reverent 
salutations and sorrowfully entered his own dwelling. 
CHAPTER 113 
Prince Bharata commences the return journey 
Then Shri Bharata, fully reconciled, taking the sandals from 
the head of the elephant, placed them on his own and ascended 
the chariot with Shatrughna, Shri Vasishtha, Vamadeva and 
Javali of firm vows, with all the sagacious counsellors preceding 
398 
AYODHYA KANDA 
him. Circulating the Mount Chittrakuta, they proceeded 
towards the east, by the river Mandakini, where they beheld 
countless veins of metal. 
Shri Bharata with his army, went forward and at a short 
distance from Chittrakuta, perceived the hermitage in which 
the holy Bharadwaja and other sages dwelt. Approaching the 
hermitage of the Sage Bharadwaja, Shri Bharata having dis mounted from his chariot, offered salutations to him. Bharadwaja, 
full of joy, said to Bharata : " O Friend, hast thou beheld Shri 
Rama ? Is thy purpose accomplished ? " 
Shri Bharata, ever devoted to his brother, answered the sage, 
saying : " O Lord, I and the holy Guru Vasishtha besought 
Rama to return, but he cheerfully replied : ' My father's decree 
that I should reside in the forest for fourteen years, shall be 
faithfully observed by me \" 
Then the learned and eloquent Shri Vasishtha, skilled in 
wisdom, addressed Shri Rama in this wise : " O Wise One, 
be pleased to bestow thy sandals, adorned with gems, on thy 
deputy. Do thou bear the good of the capital in thy heart. 
Shri Rama, in obedience to his holy Guru, turning towards 
the east, put on the sandals and thereafter delivered them 
tome. 
" Now, frustrated in my design to bring back Shri Rama, 
I am returning to Ayodhya with these sandals." 
The Maharishi Bharadwaja, then uttered these auspicious 
words : " O Prince, versed in the knowledge of virtue, thine 
excellence is as little a source of wonder, as water ever flowing 
towards a hollow. King Dasaratha, possessed of a righteous 
and duty-loving son, such as thou art, has surely found 
immortality." 
Shri Bharata, touching the feet of the holy rishi, in great 
reverence, with joined palms, circumambulated him and then, 
with his counsellors, proceeded to Ayodhya. 
The army following Prince Bharata, some riding elephants, 
some horses, and some in bullock carts, crossed the Yamuna 
with its singing waves and came to the sacred waters of the 
Ganges. 
Having crossed the holy river Gunga, with his companions, 
Shri Bharata entered the town of Shringavera and from there 
399 an 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
passed on to Ayodhya. Beholding Ayodhya, a stricken city, 
deserted by bis father, King Dasaratha and his brother Shri 
Ramachandra, Prince Bharata, deeply distressed, said to his 
charioteer : " Behold the ruined capital bereft of its former 
glory, unadorned and lacking all signs of festivity ! How silent, 
how wretched is this city, formerly so full of life." 
CHAPTER X I 4 
He finds Ayodkya desolate 
The prince, in his chariot, which gave forth a thunderous sound 
as it rolled onward, entered Ayodhya. There he beheld the city 
where cats and owls ranged, and where the doors of the dwellings 
were closed, darkness and gloom reigning over all. The city 
resembling the planet Rohini,1 that has lost its splendour on 
the moon's eclipse, or a mountain stream, whose waters have 
dried up in the sun's heat, deserted by the waterfowl, the fishes 
all having perished. 
Sad and wretched, on account of its separation from Rama, 
Ayodhya resembled the sacrificial flame, which when the oblation 
is poured into it, shines like a golden cone and then sinks into 
smoking ash, or like a mighty army divested of its weapons 
in battle, its horses, elephants, chariots and standards scattered 
abroad and its heroic warriors slain. That city which looked, 
as it were, like the waves of the sea whipped into foam by 
the storm, rolling and breaking and then sinking into silence 
with the dying out of the wind, or like the sacrificial pavilion 
deserted by the priests who go forth in search of alms after the 
sacrifice ; or lite kine bereft of the bull, who have ceased to graze 
in the pasture and stand in the enclosure dispirited ; or like a neck lace stripped of its precious gems ; or like a meteor, its virtue 
exhausted, fallen to earth, deprived of its splendour ; or like 
a flowering branch, loaded with blossom in the Spring, visited 
1 Rohini— The constellation of five stars (Taurus) containing Aldebaran, 
which star is probably meant here. Called the " Red One " and said to be 
the favourite consort of the moon. 
400 
AYODHYA KANDA 
by a swarm of bees, that is suddenly consumed by a forest 
fire. 
The streets were deserted and the fairs and markets closed, 
and no merchandise was offered for sale. Dark and fearful, 
Ayodhya resembled the moon and stars obscured by heavy clouds 
in the rainy season, or a deserted tavern, its revellers departed, 
the liquor expended and naught but fragments of broken glass 
and pots in wild disorder scattered here and there. Ayodhya 
appeared like a tank sunk into the earth, the water being spent, 
the foundations having collapsed, the jars and earthen vessels 
lying scattered amidst the thirsty, standing there in despair ; or 
it resembled the string of a great hero's bow that has been 
severed by the arrow of his adversary and is lying on the earth ; 
or an aged and ill-nourished mule, urged on by a soldier, slain 
in the battle and left unheeded. 
Viewing the desolation, Prince Bharata, seated in his chariot, 
spoke to Sumantra, who was driving the equipage : "Alas ! 
How sad that this city, formerly so gay, to-day appears so 
melancholy, the intoxicating fragrance of floral garlands and 
the scent of incense, no longer filling it. O Sumantra, I do 
not hear, as formerly, the sound of clattering chariots, the 
neighing of horses and the prolonged roaring of elephants. 
Alas ! Since Rama departed, the young men of Ayodhya have 
ceased to adorn themselves with garlands of fresh blossoms and 
sandalwood and men no longer walk abroad decked with flowers. 
No longer are festivals observed and the people of the capital 
are merged in grief; it seems as if the glory of the city had 
departed with Rama. O ! Ayodhya is bereft of light, like the 
night overcast with clouds at the time of the waxing moon. 
When will my brother, Ramachandra, return like a festival, 
diffusing joy in Ayodhya, as do the autumnal rains ? Formerly, 
the royal highways of the capital were filled with richly attired 
youths, but to-day they are all deserted." 
Wailing and lamenting, Prince Bharata entered his father's 
palace, which, bereft of the king, resembled a cave without 
a lion. 
Seeing the inner compartment in complete darkness, the prince 
wept aloud, like the gods, when warring with the titans, arc 
afflicted when beholding the darkening of the sun. 
401 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 115 
Prince Bharata retires to Nandigrama and rules the kingdom 
from that city 
The sorrowing Bharata, firm in his resolve, having brought his 
mothers back to Ayodhya, said to the holy Guru Vasishtha 
and the elders : — 
" I crave your permission to retire to Nandigrama and there 
endure the woes occasioned by Shri Rama's absence. The king 
has departed and my elder brother has entered the forest. I 
shall, therefore, await the return of Shri Rama, since verily 
he alone is Lord of Ayodhya." 
Shri Vasishtha and the counsellors, hearing the words of 
Prince Bharata, answered him saying : " O Prince, thy words, 
inspired by devotion to thy brother, are worthy of praise. 
Verily, they do thee honour ! Who will dare oppose thee, 
who art deeply attached to thy brother and who, in this land, 
has reached such an exalted state ? " 
Perceiving the counsellors reconciled to his purpose, the prince 
said to Sumantra : " Bring hither the chariot ! " 
The chariot having come, Bharata, after conversing with his 
mothers, mounted the equipage with his brother Shatrughna. 
Accompanied by the priests and ministers, the two princes 
cheerfully proceeded to Nandigrama, the Guru Vasishtha and 
the pious brahmins leading the procession. 
Then the army, elephants, horses and chariots together with 
the people of the capital, followed him unbidden. The peerless 
Bharata filled with fraternal love, carrying the sandals of Shri 
Rama on his head, at last reached Nandigrama. Dismounting 
from the chariot, he addressed his spiritual preceptor and the 
elders, saying : " My brother, Shri Rama, gave this kingdom 
to me, as a precious trust, verily these sandals, decorated with 
gold shall represent him." 
Once more lifting the sandals reverently to his head, he 
addressed the people of the capital, saying : " Ye Men of 
Ayodhya, accept these sandals as symbols of the feet of Shri 
402 
AYODHYA KANDA 
Rama. Let them rest beneath the royal canopy and wave the 
chamara over them. These are the sandals of our supreme 
Guru and by them will righteousness be established in the 
kingdom. I shall preserve the trust lovingly reposed in me 
by Rama, till his return. When he returns to Ayodhya, I, 
myself, will assist him to put on the sandals. Then I, united 
with him once more, will deliver the kingdom to him and like 
a son will I honour him. By restoring the capital and kingdom 
to Rama, I shall wash away the stigma of dishonour brought 
on me by my mother. Shri Rama will be installed and his 
subjects made happy ; then shall ill-fame pass away, and 1 shall 
win exceeding honour from the people." 
Thus lamenting, the afflicted Bharata, with the assistance of 
his counsellors, retired to Nandigrama and ruled the kingdom 
from that city. With matted locks, assuming the bark dress 
of an ascetic, Shri Bharata dwelt in Nandigrama, protected by 
bis army. 
Residing in Nandigrama, obedient to Shri Rama and faithful 
to his promise, Shri Bharata, placing the sandals on the royal 
throne, spreading the canopy over them and waving the chamara 
above them, committed the seals of the kingdom to their keeping, 
he, himself, passing his life as a servant of Rama. 
Every matter of import and all the business of state was first 
laid before the sandals, and every gift brought to the king was 
first offered to them, and afterwards treated as occasion required. 
CHAPTER I I 6 
The holy men of Chittrakuta depart, fearing the coming 
oppression of the asuras 
Bharata having departed to Ayodhya, Shri Rama perceived 
that the ascetics living on Chittrakuta were filled with apprehen sion and desirous of withdrawing from that place. 
Formerly, these holy men dwelling in Chittrakuta looked for 
Shri Rama's protection, but now they sought to take their 
403 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
departure. By the expression in their eyes and other signs, 
they manifested their misgivings and could be observed convers ing secretly in low tones with one another. 
Shri Rama, beholding their anxiety addressed them with 
humility, saying : " O Blessed Ones, has my conduct towards 
you suffered a change ? For what reason are your hearts filled 
with dread ? O Holy Ones, has my younger brother involunt arily injured you ? Or has Shri Sita, ever devoted to my service, 
given you cause for offence ? Perchance she has done that 
which is not fitting for a woman ? " 
Thus questioned, a great sage, an aged ascetic, his frame 
emaciated by austerities, tremblingly answered the Ever Compassionate One, saying : " O Child, bounteous to all that 
lives, Shri Sita is innocent of any breach of the traditional 
attitude to any, least of all towards holy men. In truth, the 
reason is that the asuras, through enmity to thee, have begun 
to oppress the sages, and therefore, they being terrified, seek 
how they may defend themselves in secret. 
" Ravana's younger brother Kara, who dwells here, is casting 
out the ascetics from their hermitages. O Friend, he is in exorable and he is a mighty warrior. He is brutal and cannot 
endure thy presence here. Since thou hast come to dwell in 
this hermitage, the asuras have increased the persecution of 
the sages. Appearing in grotesque and terrible forms, they fill 
them with terror, then to do them further mischief, they fling 
unclean and inauspicious objects into the sacred precincts, 
finally when meeting with guileless and pure-hearted hermits, 
they slay them. Those evil-hearted asuras wander everywhere 
covertly, till perceiving a sage to be alone and defenceless, they 
put an end to his life. 
"At the time of sacrifice, when the sacred fire is kindled by 
the ascetics, then do the asuras, scattering the hallowed vessels 
and ladles,, quench the fire by discharging water over it and 
destroying the utensils. O Shri Ramachandra, weary of these 
wicked asuras, the sages are urging us to abandon these 
hermitages and depart hence. 
" O Rama, those terrible asuras threaten to slay us all, 
therefore, we are leaving this hermitage. Not far distant is 
the wonderful Tapovana belonging to the Maharishi Ashwa ; 
404 
AYODHYA KANDA 
it is rich in fruits and roots, there we would dwell. O Friend, 
if it seem proper to thee, do thou come there, for thine oppression 
is also planned. 
" O Prince, though thou art able to defend thyself, thy sojourn 
here with thy holy consort is fraught with peril." 
Hearing the words of Kulupati and perceiving their anxiety 
to be gone, Shri Rama sought to persuade them to stay, but 
in vain, and the sages departed. Shri Rama accompanied them 
a short distance then, taking leave of them and offering obeisance 
to them, returned to his sacred dwelling. On leaving the holy 
men, they instructed him lovingly in the path of duty and 
bade him farewell. 
Shri Rama did not then abandon the hermitage, which the 
sages had deserted. Among them were a few who, inspired 
by Rama's example, had surrendered their hearts to him, and 
of them the prince was ever mindful. 
CHAPTER 117 
Shri Rama decides to leave the hermitage and comes to 
the ashrama of the Sage Atri 
The rishis, having left the hermitage, Shri Rama reflected on 
the matter and judged it wisest not to dwell there longer. 
Remembrance of his people, his mothers and Prince Bharata 
who had been united with him there, caused him unending 
distress. Further, the elephants and horses of Bharata's army 
had defiled and laid waste the ground, rendering it squalid and 
foul. On mature reflection, he thought " We will depart 
hence " and taking Shri Sits and Lakshmana with him, he left 
that place. 
Proceeding further, he came to the ashrama of the Sage Atri, 
and made obeisance to him, that holy one regarding him with 
a fatherly affection. He bestowed his favour likewise on Sita 
and Lakshmana and treated Rama with the hospitality due to him. 
405 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
The virtuous Sage Atri, ever devoted to the good of all, 
summoned his aged and pious wife Anasuya, and respectfully 
asking her to be seated, addressed his worthy and excellent 
spouse. He said : " Shri Sita has visited our hermitage, do 
thou take her with thee and receive her hospitably." 
Then the Sage Atri said to Ramachandra : " Formerly when 
rain was withheld for a period of ten years and the earth dried 
up, this virtuous woman, Anasuya, by her great austerity, 
produced fruits and berries for the sages and caused the sacred 
Ganges to descend so that they might bathe therein ; thus by 
her arduous ascetic practices, did she dispel the impediments 
in the path of the sages. O Sinless Rama, this is the same 
Anasuya, who at one time, to succour the sages, caused ten 
nights to be reduced to one. This Anasuya is to be highly 
revered for her age's sake, and is the object of reverence of all 
beings. Do thou permit the Princess Sita to accompany the 
meek and aged Anasuya. By her great and noble deeds, she 
has acquired immeasurable tame. Let Janaki attend her." 
Then Shri Ramachandra answered, " Be it so," and the 
illustrious prince said to Sita : " O Princess, thou hast heard 
the words spoken by the sage ; for thine own good do thou wait 
on this aged ascetic." 
Thereafter, Shri Sita went with Anasuya who was proficient 
in every virtue. On account of her age, her physical form was 
feeble and emaciated, her hair grey, whilst her body trembled 
like a palm tree agitated by a strong wind. 
Uttering her name, Shri Sita made obeisance to her, the gentle 
saint returning her salutation with great humility enquiring as 
to her welfare. The aged Anasuya, beholding Shri Sita offering 
humble obeisance, spoke encouraging words, saying : — 
" O Sita, fortunate art thou, that thou art attentive to the 
duties owed to thy consort. It is supremely auspicious that 
thou, forsaking thy people, thy individual comfort, thy wealth 
and thy possessions shouldst accompany thy husband to the forest. 
" She who is devoted to her spouse, whether in the city or 
the forest, regardless whether he be a sinner or virtuous, that 
woman attains the highest region. Whether a husband be cruel, 
or the slave of desires, or poor, a virtuous wife will continue 
406 
AYODHYA KANDA 
to worship him as a god. O Princess, I have studied deeply 
and I do not think that a woman can have a better friend than 
her husband, for he, in all circumstances, protects her. 
" O Princess of Videha, those evil women who, enslaved by 
desire, do not regard what should or should not be done, O 
Princess of Mithila, they, imprudently commit unworthy acts 
and becoming abhorrent, fall from virtue. But women such 
as thou, acquainted with what is good or evil in the world, like 
pious men, attain heaven. O Sati, thou hast ever been faithful 
to thy conjugal duty and through thy virtuous acts, undertaken 
in conjunction with thy husband, shalt attain merit and fame." 
CHAPTER I I 8 
Princess Sita receives gifts of love from the sage's wife 
The blameless Anasuya having spoken, Shri Sita, approving 
her words, gently answered : " O Noble Lady, the advice thou 
hast given me, is in no wise a source of wonder to me, for it is 
my conviction that the husband is in authority over his wife. 
Even if the husband be poor and ignorant, yet women, such 
as I, should feel no aversion for him. 
" But the husband who is worthy of praise on account of 
his excellent qualities and who is compassionate, self-controlled, 
constant in his affections, fully acquainted with his duty and 
who manifests the loving-kindness of a parent, excels all 
expectation. 
" Whatever love Shri Ramachandra bears to bis mother 
Kaushalya, he bestows equally on the other queens, and not 
this alone, but whoever the king has looked on with affection, 
that woman he also regards as his own mother. 
" When departing for the fearful forest, my mother-in-law, 
Queen Kaushalya, imparted certain instruction to me, and I 
inscribed her words on the tablet of my heart. I call to mind 
also the advice given me by mine own mother at the time of 
my nuptials. 
4<>7 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
" O Righteous One, the crowning discipline for a woman 
is the service of her lord. To-day, thou hast awakened in my 
memory the counsels formerly given to me by my relatives. 
"To-day, Savitri dwells in heaven through the service of her 
spouse, thou also shalt enter the supreme abode through service 
of thy lord. Rohini, a pearl among women and a dweller in 
the celestial region, ever accompanies the moon. Thus many 
others who have followed virtue, with fixed resolve, enter heaven 
through their merits." 
Anasuya rejoiced to hear Sita's words and kissing her head 
in benediction, said : " O Sita, much merit has accrued to me 
by prayer and fasting. O Princess, pure in heart, I desire to 
confer a boon on thee by virtue of these merits. Tell me what 
thou dost desire ? O Princess of Mithila, thy words have given 
me extreme satisfaction. Now say what good I may accomplish 
in thy name." 
Shri Sita, hearing the words of the pious Anasuya, versed 
in domestic duty, and being filled with astonishment, answered 
smilingly : "Thy loving kindness has already fulfilled my every 
desire." 
Shri Anasuya hearing these words was gratified in greater 
measure and said : " O Sita, fortunate am I to behold thee I 
Let my joy bear fruit, ask a boon. I can give thee celestial 
garlands, apparel and precious unguents to adorn thy person. 
O Daughter of Janaka, my gifts would enhance thy beauty, 
they will never fade and they will become thee well. Apply 
this powder which I now give to thee ; thou shalt, by this, 
augment thy husband's beauty as Lakshmi increases the glory 
of the imperishable Vishnu." 
The princess accepted the robes, powder and ornaments, 
gifts of love, from the ascetic The illustrious Sita, having 
received the symbols of affection from Anasuya, sat down near 
her with joined palms. 
Then Anasuya requested Shri Sita to relate something of 
moment, saying : " O Sita, I have heard a brief account of 
thy wedding, describe it to me now in detail." 
Shri Sita obediently answered : " Hear me, and I will relate 
it all to thee. The King of Mithila, that brave and virtuous 
monarch, Janaka, the protector of his people as befits a warrior, 
408 
AYODHYA KANDA 
once, when ploughing the earth to establish sacrificial ground, 
beheld me like a daughter emerging from the furrow. At that 
time, the king repeating the holy texts, was scattering the seed 
of herbs and, seeing my body besmeared with dust, was 
astonished. Being without issue, he took me in his arms and 
said, * This shall be my daughter ', and treated me with extreme 
love. Then a voice rang out from the heavens, saying : * O 
King, verily she is thy daughter.* 
" The king rejoiced in my possession and since my birth his 
prosperity has increased. That sovereign, constant in the 
performance of sacrifice, gave me into the care of his chief queen, 
she nourishing me with maternal affection. When I came to 
maturity, my father grew anxious, like an indigent man who 
is bereft of all he possesses. 
" The lather of a daughter, be he equal to Indra, must defer 
to his son-in-law, whether in status he be his peer or his inferior. 
My father was willing to submit to this eventuality and was 
consumed with anxiety, as one desirous of crossing a river, 
who finds himself without the means of transport. 
"After much seeking, he was unable to find a suitable bride groom and was beset with fears. On profound reflection, he 
resolved to convene a meeting of princes, that I might elect 
a husband. 
" In ancient days, on the occasion of a sacrifice, one of our 
royal forbears received from Varuna, a great bow with two 
quivers that should never lack arrows. The bow was so heavy 
that many persons together could not move it and no monarch 
could draw it, even in dream. 
'* By his merit, my honoured sire had acquired the bow and 
he, summoning the kings in council, addressed them, saying : 
* Ye Sovereigns of Men, I will give my daughter in marriage 
to him who is able to lift up and string this bow.' 
" The kings, beholding the bow resembling a mountain in 
weight, unable to lift it up, made obeisance to it and went 
their way. 
"After a long time, the resplendent Ramachandra came to 
my father's sacrifice in company with the Sage Vishwamitra. 
The king, my father, offered that truth-loving hero together 
with the Sage Vishwamitra, abundant hospitality. 
409 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
" Then Shri Vishwamitra said to the king : * These are the 
two sons of King Dasaratha, who desire to see the bow. Be 
gracious enough to allow these two princes to view it.* 
" King Janaka commanded the bow to be brought as requested 
by the Sage Vishwamitra. 
" In an instant, Shri Ramachandra, lifting the bow, drew it. 
Having been bent by the thong, the bow broke in two, creating 
a sound like the crash of thunder. Thereafter, my honoured 
father caused water to be brought and offered to Shri Rama chandra and prepared to bestow me on him, but Shri 
Ramachandra did not consent to accept my hand till the inten tions of his own father were known. 
" King Janaka then requested the aged King Dasaratha to 
come thither and he, acquiescing in the matter, did so. With 
his approval I was pledged to the great-souled Ramachandra ; 
my younger sister, a guileless girl, Urmila, being wedded to 
Shri Lakshmana. 
" O Great Ascetic, thus was I bestowed in marriage and 
since then have taken extreme delight in ministering to my 
Lord, Shri Ramachandra, as is my duty." 
CHAPTER 119 
The holy ascetics bless the exiles who enter the forest 
Shri Anasuya, faithful to duty, listened to this stirring narrative 
and, taking hold of Shri Sita's hands, embraced her, savouring 
the fragrance of her locks, then she addressed her, saying : " I 
have heard thy tale brilliantly and lucidly set forth, which thou 
hast so singularly related to me. O Sweet-speaking One, I 
would tain hear more of thy story, but the sun has gone down 
behind the Asatalachala mountain and the lovely night is near 
at hand. See t the birds who have sought food far and wide 
all the day, are now returning home to rest. Hark ! how 
they sing ! The holy ascetics, too, are returning from their 
bathing in their wet robes of bark with loshtas in their hands. 
410 
AYODHYA KANDA 
The smoke, in hue resembling a pigeon's neck, rising from 
the Sages' sacred fires is being driven by the wind here and 
there. The bare trees, scarcely seen in the distance, appear 
like dense clouds in the gathering darkness. The light is slowly 
fading in every quarter. See, the rangers of the night are 
abroad and the deer of the Tapovana forest are sleeping round 
the sacred altars. Behold ! O Sita ! The night adorned with 
stars is come and the moon diffusing her light has appeared 
in the heavens. 
"Do thou go, O Princess, and minister to thy lord, Shri 
Ramachandra. How fortunate am I to have had sweet converse 
with thee ! O Princess, do thou attire thyself in these robes 
and ornaments, and thus increase my delight." 
Shri Sita adorning herself in the gorgeous apparel, placed 
her head at the feet of Anasuya and departed. 
Shri Ramachandra, that most eloquent one, seeing Sita 
adorned with the ornaments given to her by Anasuya, was filled 
with joy. Shri Sita then told him of the liberality of the aged 
ascetic, and showed him all her gifts. Rare indeed were those 
gifts and Shri Rama and the great warrior Shri Lakshmana, 
rejoiced over the bounty of Anasuya. 
The night passed and day dawned, the two princes bathed, 
performed their morning devotions and then approached the 
ascetics for food. 
The pious hermits then addressed Shri Rama and said : " O 
Prince, it is dangerous to wander in the forest on account of 
the presence of asuras. O Prince, wandering about in various 
guises, these beings feed on human flesh and drink the blood 
of men. These creatures like wild beasts kill and devour any 
ascetic who is negligent or impure. O Prince, for our sake, 
do thou destroy them. This path, O Prince, is the way by 
which the sages go to gather fruit, let it be thy path also." 
Then the holy men humbly blessed Shri Rama and he, the 
harasser of his foes, entered the forest as the sun enters a dark 
cloud. 
END OF AYODHYA KANDA. 
4« 
GLOSSARY 
(Note: For Flowers, Trees, and Weapons, see separate Glossaries.) 
Achmana ceremony— purificatory rite, at which water is taken in 
the palms of the hands, and poured on the head and breast. 
Apiti. Mother of the Gods, representing space and infinity. 
Adityas. Sun gods, sons of Aditi. 
Agastya. A rishi, reputed author of several hymns in the Rig-Veda. 
Agni. God of fire. 
Ahalya. Wife of the Rishi Gautama, who was transformed into 
a rock by his curse and ultimately restored by Shri Rama. 
Alaka. The capital of Kuvera q.v. 
Amaravati. The capital of Indra q.v. 
Ammta. " The Nectar of Immortality " produced by the churning 
of the ocean by devas and asuras. 
Ananga. Bodiless. A name of Kandarpa, the God of Love. 
Anasoya. A great saint, wife of the Rishi Atri. 
Anga. The kingdom ruled over by King Lomapada, probably 
Bengal. 
Apsaras. "Ap " meaning water. " Yara " to emerge from— water 
sprites, they were the wives of the Gandharvas q.v. 
Arghya. A ceremonial offering of water, milk, kusha grass, rice, 
durva, sandalwood, flowers, etc. 
Akyamana. Chief of the pittris or ancestors. 
Ashaba. When the sun enters the sign Gemini. 
Ashoka. One of King Dasaratha's counsellors. 
Ashrama. Hermitage. 
ASWA-MSDHA. Horse-sacrifice of Vedic times, performed only by 
kings. 
Aswini-Kumajas or Aswins. The celestial horsemen, precursors 
of the dawn, twin offspring of Surya the sun god. 
Asota. A demon, enemy of the Gods. 
Atharva Vbda. The fourth Veda. 
Atri. One of the seven immortal sages. 
Atyartha Sadaka. One of King Dasaratha's chief counsellors. 
Ayodhya. Capital of Koshala, the kingdom ruled over by King 
Dasaratha, probably Oudh. 
Ayurveda. " The Veda of Life." A work on medicine attributed 
to the Sage Dhanwantari. 
4'3 
GLOSSARY 
B 
Bahadur. A title of honour. 
Bala and Atibala. A mystical science or magic formulae used for 
the discharge of sacred weapons. 
Bali or Vali. Brother of Sugriva, the monkey King. Bali was 
slain by Shri Rama. 
Bhagiratha. Descendant of King Sagara, whose austerities caused 
the sacred river Ganges to come down to earth. 
Bhagirathi. A name of the river Ganges or Gunga after the Sage 
Bhagiratha. 
Bharata. Brother of Shri Rama and son of Queen Kaikeyi and 
Dasaratha. 
Bharatvarsh. Ancient India. 
Bilaradwaja. A Vedic Sage, to whom many Vedic hymns are 
attributed. He received the sons of King Dasaratha in the forest 
and entertained them there. 
Bhrigu. A Vedic Sage, said to be the son of Manu, the Progenitor 
of mankind. 
Bhur, Bhuvah, Swah. Lower, middle and upper worlds. 
Bibishana or Vibishana — Brother of Ravana, but a devotee of Shri 
Rama, who conferred the Kingdom of Lanka on him after 
Ravana's death. 
Bishaka or Vishaka. A devotee of abstraction of mind, or the 
constant contemplation of the Deity. 
Brahman. The Absolute, The Highest Reality, Attributeless Being. 
Brahma. The creative aspect of Divinity, Shri Vishnu being the 
maintaining aspect as opposed to Shri Shiva the destructive 
aspect. 
Bramachari. Religious student, living in the house of a spiritual 
Teacher, having taken certain vows. 
Brahmacharini. Feminine of Brahmachari. 
Brahma-Jnana. Knowledge of Truth or the Highest Reality, 
Brahman . 
Bratasura or Vratasuka or Vritka— An asura slain by Indra. 
Brihaspati. Jupiter, the Spiritual Preceptor of the Gods, also the 
Regent of the planet Jupiter. 
C 
Castes, the Four— priest, warrior, merchant and those who serve 
the other three. 
Chakra Vara. Brahmany duck or ruddy goose. 
Chamara— Chowric, a fan made of Yak's tail, insignia of royalty. 
Chandala. An outcaste. 
Chttra. The planet Spica. The month Chitra or Chaitra is 
approximately between February and March. 
Chitraratha. King of the Gandharvas, celestial musicians. 
Chijtrakuta. A sacred mountain, the residence of Shri Rama 
and Sita in exile, still a holy retreat. 
414 
GLOSSARY 
D 
Daityas. Titans. 
Daksha. Son of Shri Brahma ; his daughter Uma was the consort 
of Shiva. 
Dakshina. Traditional offering made after a sacred ceremony. 
Dakavas. A race of giants, enemies of the Gods. 
Dandaka. A vast forest lying between the rivers Godavari and 
Narmada, the scene of Shri Rama and Sita's exile. 
Dasaratha. King of Koshala, father of Shri Rama, Lakshmana 
Bharata and Shatrughna. 
Devas. The Gods or Shining Ones. 
Devi. A title given to Parvati, Shiva's consort. 
Dranuda. A name of Kuvera. 
Dhara. Wife of the Sage Kasyapa. 
Dharma. Traditionally ordained course of conduct, or duty. The 
Law of Righteousness. 
Dhristi. One of the chief counsellors of King Dasaratha. 
Dhuma. God of Smoke. 
Dhundhumara. Slayer of the demon Dhundu, a title of the King 
Kuvalayaswa. 
Dilipa. Father of the Sage Bharadwaja. 
Dm. Daughter of Daksha, wife of Kasyapa, mother of the Daityas. 
Divisions of Time, the Three — Past, present and future. 
Drona. A measure approximating 92 lbs. 
Dundhubi. The name of a giant, it also means a kettle drum. 
Dusana. A demon slain by Shri Rama. 
Dyumatsena. Prince of Srabra, father of Satyavanta. 
Gadhi . Father of the Sage Vishwamitra and son of King Kushanaba, 
hence the patronymic Kaushika. 
Gandhamadana. A general of the monkey army, killed by Indrajita, 
also the name of a mountain, " The Mount of Intoxicating 
Fragrance ". 
Gandharvas. Celestial musicians. 
Ganges. The sacred river Gunga, also known as Bhagirathi, 
Harasekhara or the Crest of Shiva, Khapaga, Flowing from 
Heaven, Tripathaga, Three-way-flowing, Mandakini, Gently 
flowing, Jahnavi after the Sage Jahnu. 
Garuda. King of birds, the Vehicle of Shri Vishnu and the Destroyer 
of serpents. 
Gautama. A great sage, the husband of Ahalya, q.v. 
Gayatri. The most sacred prayer of the Rig-Veda. 
Godha. A piece of leather or metal worn on the left arm to protect it 
from the bow-string. 
Goha. A soft leather, possibly cow or doeskin. 
Gbihi. A person who, having finished his education, marries and 
becomes a householder. 
415 2B 
GLOSSARY 
Guha. King of the Nishadas, a mountain tribe, a great devotee 
of Shri Rama. 
Guru. A traditional Teacher, one who dispels ignorance. 
H 
Hanuman. A monkey chief, son of Pavana and Anjana. Hanuman 
was the ideal devotee and servant of Shri Rama. 
Hari. A name of the Lord meaning " Captivating ", " Pleasing ". 
Hawan. A particular offering to the Gods, an ancient fire ceremony. 
Ikshwaku. Son of Manu, founder of the Solar race of Kings, 
who reigned in Ayodhya. 
Indra. The King of the Gods or Devas. 
Ingudi Tree. Sacred fig tree. 
Jagari. Coarse brown Indian sugar made from palm sap. 
Jahnu. The sage who drank up the sacred river Ganges. 
Jambudwipa. One of the seven continents of which the world was 
said to be composed. 
Janaka. King of Mithila, father of Sita. 
Janaki. A name of Sita. 
Japa. Silent repetition of a prayer or sacred formula. 
Jatayu. King of the vultures, who fought Ravana when he was 
abducting Sita. 
Jaya. Producer of weapons. 
Jayanta. King Dasaratha's counsellor. 
Juta. The matted locks of a devotee. 
Kabandha. An asura or demon. 
Kaikeya. The kingdom ruled over by King Kaikeya. 
Kaikhyi. Favourite Queen and consort of King Dasaratha, mother 
of Bharata. 
Kailasha. Sacred mountain, the abode of Shiva. 
Kaundi. Wife of King Asit. 
Kama or Kandarpa. Indian cupid or God of Love. 
Kapila. A great sage, who destroyed the sons of King Sagara. 
Karma. The law governing the behaviour of matter in all its gross 
and subtle forms, according to the divine purpose. 
Karttika. When the sun enters Libra (October). 
Kakttikeya. God of war, son of Shiva, also called Skanda, 
416 
GLOSSARY 
KasYAPA or Kashyapa. The great Vedic Sage, grandson of Brahma, 
and father of Vivaswat. 
Katyayaha. An ancient writer of great celebrity, author of the 
Dharmashastra. 
Kavpin. Loin cloth. 
KAUSHALYA. Chief Queen of King Dasaratha and mother of Shri 
Rama. 
Kaushika. Title of Vishwamitra after his grandfather. 
Kaushiki. A river, said to be the sister of Shri Vishwamitra. 
Kaustubha. Celebrated jewel, churned from the ocean and worn 
by Shri Vishnu. 
Kavandava. A species of duck. 
Kavyahanas. A special class of celestial being. 
Kesiini. Chief Queen of King Sagara. 
Khara. A demon. 
Khiva or Kheeva. Frumenty : hulled wheat boiled in milk and 
sweetened. 
Kinds of Taste. See under " Six ". 
Kinneras. Celestial Beings attendant on Kuvera. 
Kishkindhya. The country ruled over by Bali (possibly Mysore) 
given to Sugriva by Rama. 
Koshala. The kingdom ruled over by King Dasaratha. 
Krauncha. A species of heron, Ardea Jaculator. 
Krittikas. The Pleiades, nurses of the God of War. 
Kshiroda. The ocean of milk. 
Kubija. Hunchback. 
Kumbhakarna. Brother of Ravana, a great warrior killed by Shri 
Rama. 
Kusha. One of the sons of Shri Rama and Sita. (See Lava.) 
Kuvera. God of wealth. 
Lagnas. The twelve signs of the Zodiac are considered as rising 
above the horizon in the course of the day. The Lagna has 
the name of the sign, its duration is from the first rising of 
the sign till the whole is above the horizon. Lagna literally 
means the point where the horizon and the path of the planet 
meet. 
Lagna-Karka. Cancer. 
Lagna-Mbska. Pisces. 
Lakshmana. Son of Queen Sumitra and King Dasaratha, favourite 
brother of Shri Rama. Shri Lakshmana was said to be an 
incarnation of the thousand-headed serpent Shssha who upholds 
the world. 
Lakshmi. The consort of Shri Vishnu also known as " Shri " 
signifying prosperity. 
Lanka. Ceylon, the Kingdom ruled over by the Titan King, 
Ravana. 
417 
GLOSSARY 
Lava. One of the sons of Shri Rama and Sita. (See Kusfaa.) 
Lav ana. Son of Madhu, a demon. 
Lohitanga. Mars. 
Lokapalas. Guardians of the four quartets. 
Loshta. A vessel of coconut or metal used for begging or cere monial purposes. 
M 
Madhuparka. A mixture of curds, butter, honey and the milk of 
coconut, a traditional offering. 
Madhusudana. Name of Shri Vishnu, meaning Destroyer of 
Madhu, a demon. 
Magda-phalguni. The season from the middle of January to the 
middle of March. 
Maghavan. A title of the god, Indra. 
Mahadbva. Great God, a title of Shiva. 
Mahatma. Great-souled One, title given to a Sage or Rishi. 
Maina. Mina or Mynah, a small percher, about the size of a swallow, 
which can be taught to repeat words. 
Maireyi or Mikeya. Liquor extracted from the blossom of the 
Lythrum Fricticosum tree mixed with sugar. 
MAITRA. Period of the early morning. 
Manasorovara. Lake on Mount Kailasha (literally : Lake of the 
Mind). 
Mandavi. Bharata's wife. 
Mandodari. Wife of Ravana. 
Manthara. The hunchbacked maid of Queen Kaikeyi. 
Mantras or Mantrams. Sacred formulas. 
Mantra-Pala. One of King Dasaratha's chief counsellors. 
Maricha. A demon. 
Markandeya. A sage, remarkable for his austerities, author of the 
Markandeya Parana. 
Maruts. Storm Gods. 
Matali. Indra's charioteer. 
Maya. The deluding power (Shakti) of the Lord, by which the 
universe has come into existence and appears to be real. 
Megha. Regent of the clouds. 
Minaka. A mountain north of Kailasha. 
Mithila. The city ruled over by King Janaka, capital of Videha. 
Mlecchas. Foreigners, barbarians, eaters of flesh. 
Muni. A holy sage, a pious and learned person, title applied to 
rishis and others. 
N 
Nagas. The serpent race. 
Nahusha. Father of King Yayati. Nahusha'a curious story is found 
in the Mahabharata and Puranas. 
4i8 
GLOSSARY 
Nakshateas. The Hindus, beside the common division of the 
Zodiac into twelve signs, divided it into 27 Nakshatras, z{ in 
each sign. Each Nakshatra has its appropriate name : — 
1. Aswini. 2. Bharani. 3. Krittika. 4. Rohmi. 5. Mr'gas iras. 6. Ardea. 7. Punarvasu. 8. Pushya. 9. Alesha. 
10. Magna. 11. Purva-phalguni. 12. UttaraphaJguni. 13. 
Hasta. 14. Chitra. 15. Svati. 16. Vishaka. 17. Anuradha. 
18. Jyesatha. 19. Mula. 20. Purvashadha. 21. Uttara shraddha. 22. Abijit. 23. Sravana. 24. Sravishtha or 
Dhanishta. 25. Shatabhishaj. 26. Purva Bhadrapada. 27. 
Uttara-Bhadrapada. 28. Revati. 
(The last used if 22 Abijit is omitted.) 
Nala and Nila. Monkey chiefs, allies of Shri Rama, who built 
the bridge from India to Ceylon. 
Nandigrama. The city fiom which Shri Bharata ruled in the 
absence of Shri Rama. 
Nandimukha. Distribution of cows in charity after a sacred 
ceremony. 
Narada. A great rishi, son of Shri Brahma ; many hymns of the 
Rig Veda are attributed to him. 
Narayana. A name of Shri Vishnu, " He whose abode is the 
waters ". 
Nishadas. A mountain tribe dwelling in the Vindhya mountains 
subsisting on hunting. 
Pampa. A beautiful lake on the banks of which Shri Rama and Sita 
stayed during their exile. 
Parantapa. Oppressor of the enemy, title of respect. 
Parasurama. Rama with the axe, 6th Avatara or Incarnation of 
Shri Vishnu, the son of Yamadagni and Renuka. 
Parvati. A name of Uma, consort to Lord Shiva. 
Fatal a. The infernal regions. 
Favana. The father of Shri Hanuman. 
Payasa. A special preparation of rice in milk. 
Pisachas. Ghosts. 
PiTTRis. Spirits of the Ancestors. 
PouLASTYA. One of the seven Great Sages. 
Frajapati. " Lord of Creatures," a creator, title given to Shri 
Brahma as also to his mind-born sons. 
Prayaga. The confluence of the Ganges and the Yamuna, a sacred 
spot. 
Punarvasu. The 7th and most favoured Nakshatra q.v. 
Puranas. Legends and tales of ancient times in epic form, eighteen 
in number. 
Pusha or Pushan. The sun. 
Pushpaka. The aerial chariot used by King Ravana and later 
Shri Rama. 
4*9 
GLOSSARY 
Pushya. The name of the 6th lunar mansion, also of a constellation 
of three stars. 
Puttmsti. Ceremony for extending the race by having sons. 
Raghava. Title of those belonging to the House of Raghu to which 
King Dasaratha and Shri Rama belonged. 
Rahu. A mythical demon said to cause the eclipse of sun and moon. 
Rajasuya sacrifice. A great sacrifice performed in ancient times 
at the installation ofa king. 
Rakshasas. Demons. 
Rama or Ramachandra. The Incarnation of Shri Vishnu, and the 
eldest son of King Dasaratha. It is round this great figure 
that the Ramayana is constructed. 
Rama-Katha. The recitation of Ramayana which has been a 
tradition in India for thousands of years. 
Rambha. An apsara (q.v.) symbolising the perfection of female 
beauty from Indra's realm. 
Ravana. King of Lanka, a ten-headed demon who abducted Sita, 
Rama's consort. 
Rism. An illumined sage. There are four classes of Rishi :— 
Rajarishi— a royal Rishi, 
Maharishi — a great Rishi, 
Brahmarishi— a sacred Rishi, 
Devarishi — a divine Rishi. 
Rishyasringa. The " Deer-horned " Son of the Sage Vibhandaka 
who married the daughter of King Lomapada, Shanta, and later 
performed the Puttresti ceremony (q.v.) for King Dasaratha. 
Rishya-Mukha. A mountain, the abode of Sugriva, the monkey 
Sadhyas. Demi-gods. 
Sampati. The vulture, brother of Jatayu q.v. 
Samudra. Lord of rivers, guilty of slaying a brahmin. 
Sakat-Kuhara. Mind-born son of Shri Brahma, the Creator. 
Sapindi ceremony. The establishing of a connection with kindred 
through funereal offerings. 
Sapurna. A name of Garuda q.v. 
Sarabha. Legendary animal with eight legs. 
Sarayu. Sacred river, the Sarju river. 
Satyavanta. The husband of Savitri q.v. 
Satyavati. A sister of Shri Vishwamitra, transformed into the 
Kaushiki river. 
Satya-Yuga. The Golden Age. There are four ages :— 
The Satya or Golden Age. 
The Treta or Silver Age. 
4» 
GLOSSARY 
The Dwapara or Copper Age. 
Kali or Iron Age. 
Saura. Literally relating to the sun, a divine potion. 
Savitri. Daughter of King Aswapati who rescued her husband 
Satyavanta from the God of death. 
SHABALA. The wish-fulfilling cow belonging to Shri Vasishtha. 
Shabari or Shibri. A female ascetic, great devotee of Shri Rama, 
whom he visited in the forest. 
Shakra. A name of the God India. 
Shakra-Dhwaza. A ceremony in honour of Indra. 
Shanta. Daughter of King Lomapada, married to the Sage Rishya sringa. 
Sharabhanga. A hermit Sage visited by Shri Rama and Sita in 
the Dandaka forest. 
Shastra. Teachings of divine or recognised authority. 
Shatananda. Son of the Sage Gautama and spiritual preceptor 
at the Court of King Janaka. 
Shatrughna. Fourth son of King Dasaratha, son of Queen Sumitra. 
Shri or Sri. A name of Lakshmi the consort of Shri Vishnu. Also 
a title of honour of Gods, kings and heroes. 
Shiva. Lord of Bliss, He who destroys ignorance. 
Shivya or Shivi. A king of the Raghu dynasty who rescued the god 
Agni who had transformed himself into a pigeon and was pursued 
by Indra in the form of a hawk, by offering the weight of the 
pigeon in his own flesh. 
Shona. A sacred river. 
Shruta-Kirtti. Wife of Shatrughna. 
Shudra. Lowest of the four castes. 
Shukra. Brilliant, bright, name of the star Venus. 
Shurparnakha. Sister of Ravana, a female demon, mutilated by 
Shri Rama and Lakshmana. 
Siddharta. One of King Dasaratha's counsellors. 
Siddhas. Semi-divine beings who dwell between the earth and the 
sun. 
Sindhu. The river Indus, also a country east of Koshala. 
Singhika. A female demon, who imprisoned the shadows of her 
victims. 
Sita. Literally " a furrow ". Daughter of King Janaka, consort 
of Shri Rama. 
Six kinds op taste. Sweet, bitter, acid, salt, pungent, acrid or harsh. 
Skanda. God of war, son of Shiva. 
Soma. The fermented juice of Asclepias-adda, used as a beverage 
or libation in sacred ceremonies. 
f^J^^ Jcountrics east of Koshala. 
Suchbna. Son of Varum, Lord of the waters, 
4" 
GLOSSARY 
Sugriva. Monkey King, a friend of Shri Rama who gave him the 
Kingdom of Kishkindhya. 
Sumantra. Prime minister of King Dasaratha. 
Sumati. Younger wife of King Sagara, who gave birth to a gourd 
containing sixty thousand sons. 
Sumitra. One of the queens of King Dasaratha, mother of Laksh mana and Shatrughna. 
Suprabha. A goddess who created divine weapons. 
Suras. A name of the Gods. 
Sutikshna, A hermit sage who dwelt in the Dandaka forest. 
Suyajna. A spiritual director of King Dasaratha. 
Swyambhu. The Self-existent, a name of the Creator Shri Brahma. 
Tapovana. A forest much frequented by holy sages. 
Tara. The daughter of Brihaspati q.v. 
Taraka. A female demon. 
Three Divisions of Time — Past, present and future. 
Three Worlds, The— Bhur, Bhurah, Swah, Lower, middle and 
upper worlds. 
Tripathaka. Traverser of the Three Worlds, a name of the sacred 
river Ganges. 
Tripura. A demon slain by Shiva. 
Trishanku. A King of the Solar race who desired to enter heaven 
in his physical form and later became the planet of that name 
through the powers of the Sage Vishwamitra. 
Trishira. A demon slain by Shri Rama. 
U 
Uma. A name of Parvati, Shiva's consort. 
Upa-Naya. The ceremony of investitute of the sacred thread by 
which act, spiritual birth is conferred on the youth and he is 
reckoned a member of lite Twice-born (brahmins) class. The 
age when this ceremony takes place is between eight and sixteen 
years. 
Upendra. A name of Indra. 
Urmila. The wife of Shri Lakshmana. 
Uttara-Phalguni. The twelfth Nakshatra q.v. 
Vaidya. A physician. 
Vairuntha. The abode of Shri Vishnu. 
Vaisbyas. The merchant or agricultural caste. 
Vaja-Pfya. A sacrifice at which an acetous mixture of meal and 
water is offered to the Gods. 
Valmiki. The Great Sage, author of Ramayana. 
422 
GLOSSARY 
Vamadeva. A Vedic Rishi, author of many hymns. 
Vamana. The Holy Dwarf, fifth divine Incarnation of Shri Vishnu. 
Varuna. Lord of the waters, the Indian Neptune. 
Varuni. Daughter of Varuna,, who symbolises wine. 
Vasishtha. One of the seven great sages. He was the spiritual 
preceptor of the House of Raghu. 
Vasuki. King of the Snakes. 
Vayu. God of the winds. 
Veda. The Holy Scriptures of the Hindu religion. Fountain of 
divine knowledge. 
Vibhandaka. Son of the Sage Kasyapa and father of Rishyasringa. 
Vidarbha. The country which is probably Birar, whose capital 
was Kundinapura. 
Vina. A stringed musical instrument. 
Vinata. The mother of Garuda. 
Virochana. A giant, father of Bali. 
Vishaka. One of the Nakshatras (q.v.), also a month of the Spring 
season. 
Vishnu. The divine Maintainer of the Universe. 
Vishwamitra. A great sage, whose story is told in the Ramayana. 
Vratrasura or Vritra. See Bratrasura. 
Yaksha, Yashini. Supernatural beings attendant on the God of 
wealth, Kuvera. 
Yama. The God of Death. 
YAYATI. A forbear of King Dasaratha, his story appears in several 
of the great classics, Vishnu-Purana, Mahabharata, etc. 
Yoga. A school of philosophy of which the most important is the 
Adwaita (non-dualist) system elaborated by Shri Shankaracharya. 
Yojana. Approximately eight miles. 
423 
WEAPONS 
Agneya. The fiery weapon. 
Alakshya. That which cannot be seen in its course. 
Ardea. The web (see Shuska). 
Arhani. The thunderbolt. 
Avangmukha. Weapon with head hanging. 
Avarana. Weapon of Protection. 
B 
Brahma-Pasha. Net or noose of Brahma. (Pasha meaning a rope.) 
Brahmashira. Brahma-headed. 
D 
Danda or Dunda. Literally staff. Rod of punishment. 
Darana. To tear or split asunder. 
DARPANA. Drying-up weapon. 
Dashaksha. The ten-eyed weapon. 
Dasha-Shirsha. The ten-headed weapon. 
Ohana. Weapon of wealth. 
Dhanya. Rice weapon. 
Dharma Discos or Dharma Pala. The noose of the God of 
Justice. 
Dharma-Nabha. Of sacred navel. 
Dharma-Pasha. One who has the power of entangling the foe. 
Dhrishta. The active weapon. 
Dhriti. Weapon of forbearance. 
Disc of Dharma. Disc of virtue. 
Disc of Kala. Disc of death. 
Ditya. The titan. 
Drirnabha. Of firm navel. 
Dunda-Nabha. The Dunda navclled. 
G 
Gandharva. Weapon given by the Gandharvas, celestial musicians, 
424 
GLOSSARY 
H 
Haya-Shisa. The horse-headed. 
I 
Indka. The weapon of Indra. 
Ishika. The ardent weapon. 
Jyotishma. The luminous. 
K 
Kala Discus. See Disc of Kala. 
Kala-Pasha. Death noose. 
Kamaruchi. Able to do what it pleases. 
Kamarupa. Able to assume any form at will. 
Kandabpa. Creating sex desire. 
Kankana. Weapon protecting the side (possibly some kind of 
armour). 
Kapala. A helmet. 
Karavira. Weapon of the valiant hand. 
Kinkini. A small beU. 
Koumodaki. Giving joy to the earth. 
Krovncha. From the bird of that name, q.v. 
L 
Lakshya. That which may be seen in its course. 
Lohita Mukhi. Bloody mouthed. 
M 
Maha Nabha. Large navelled. 
Maha Vahu. The great armed or handed. 
Makasa. The sea monster. 
Mail The necklaced. 
Manava. Weapon of Manu. 
Mathana. Weapon that hurts or injures. 
Mayadhara. The great deception. 
Modana. The weapon of inebriation. 
Moha. That which causes loss of consciousness. 
Mohan. The weapon of attraction. 
Mushala or Moushala. A club. 
N 
Mandana. Joy-producing weapon. 
Narayana. Literally— residing in water. 
NrxASHYA. The discourager. 
Kishkali. The peaceful. 
O 
GLOSSARY 
P 
Paisha Astra. The ghostly weapon, one belonging to the Pisachas, 
ghosts or demons. 
Paramo Dara Astra. Supreme clearing weapon. 
Pashupata. The weapon sacred to Shiva. 
Pinaka. Shiva's bow. 
Pisbacha. Missile belonging to the Pisachas. 
Pitryia. Connected with the ancestors (Pittris). 
Prama Thana. The churner. 
Prashamana. Weapon of destruction. 
Praswaprana. To do with inhaling the vital airs. 
Pratihardara. That which prevents the effects of other weapons. 
Puramg Mukha. Having the face averted. 
R 
Rabhasa. The desolator. 
Rati. Weapon of enjoyment. 
RucHIRA. The approving weapon. 
Rudra. Weapon sacred to Rudra (Shiva). 
Samvartta. The covering weapon. 
Sandhana. The arm weapon. 
Santapana. One of the arrows of Kamadeva, the God of Love, 
a weapon that scorches ana burns up. 
Sarichimau. That which has force. 
Sarpa-Natha. Lord of serpents. 
Satya-Astra. The existence weapon. 
Satyakirti. The justly famed. 
Saura. The heroic weapon. 
Shaktis. Powers. 
Shakuna. The vulture-shaped. 
Shankara. The cause of welfare — Shiva's weapon. 
Shatavaktra. Hundred mouthed. 
Shitesu. A sharp arrow. 
Shatodara. The hundred-bellied. 
Shoshana. A weapon used to dry up water and counteract the 
Varshana weapon, g. v. 
Shuchivanu. The pure-handed. 
Shuska. The dry weapon. 
Somastra. The dew weapon. 
Soumanva. With a controlled mind. 
Sunabhuka. Of fine navel. 
Swapana. To do with the act of sleeping. 
Swanabhuka. Rich-navelled. 
426 
GLOSSARY 
T 
Trimbhaka. The gaper. 
Twashtra. Possessing the power of Twashtra, architect of the gods. 
USIRATNA. A scimitar. 
Varshana. Rain-producing weapon. 
Varuna Pasha. Net of Varuna. 
VATRA. Caused by wind (Vatri " Blower "). 
Vayuvya. Having the power of the wind. 
Vtddana. Weapon that rends or tears asunder. 
Vidhuta. The strongly vibrating. 
Vidya Dhaka. Weapon from the demi-gods. 
Vilapana. Weapon causing wailing. 
Vimala. The pure. 
Vinidra. The somniferous. 
Vishnu Discus. Disc of Vishnu. 
W 
X 
Y 
Y. Yogandhara. The united. 
Z 
FLOWERS AND TREES 
(Note ; Many of the following have no English equivalent— wherever 
possible the Latin term is given.) 
Amlaka. A many-branched shrub resembling hemlock. Phyllanthus 
Emblica, 
Ankotha. AUangirium Hexapetalum. 
Arista. Soap plant— Sapindus Saponeria. 
Asana. Indian Almond — Terminalia Alata Tomentosa. 
Ashoka. A coconut-like tree. 
Ashwa-Karna. Vatica Robusta. 
Ashwa-Lagma. Saul me. 
427 
GLOSSARY 
B 
Radsi or Vadri. Jujube plant — Zixyphus Jujuba. 
Bhanduka. Calosanthes Indica. 
Bhavya. A small fruit tree allied to the Magnolia-sillenia Spedosa. 
Bilwa. A citrus fruit used in the manufacture of sherbet. 
Burgad. Banyan tree — Ecus bengalensis. L. 
C 
Champaka. A species of magnolia. 
D 
Deva Paru. A variety of pine. 
Deva Parna. Medicinal plant (the Divine Leaf). 
Dhanwaxia. A special of twining plant— Echites Antidy Senteric. 
Dhara. A variety of Acacia. 
Dhatri. Sterosperraum Aciderifolium. 
Dhuva. One of the Acacia family. 
Durva Grass. Bent grass. Panicum Dactylon. 
£ 
G 
Guxak. A resinous tree, fragments of which are put into the water 
in a loshta for ceremonial purposes. 
Jambu. Rose apple. Eugenia Jamboliera. 
Jamnu. Bird cherry. Prunus padus. L. 
Kamranga. Averrhoa carambola. 
Kapitha. Jack fruit. 
Karnikara. Pterospermum Acerifolium. 
KasanarI. Liquorice plant. Gmelina Arborea. 
Kedumbra. A tree with orange-coloured fragrant flowers. 
Kujaja. A medicinal tree. 
Kuraka. OHvanum tree. Boswellia Thorifera. 
Kusha or Darbha Grass. Sacred grass used in religious ceremonies. 
A grass of long stalks and pointed leaves like rushes. Desmo stachya Bipennata. 
438 
GLOSSARY 
L 
Lodhra. Simplocos Racemosa. The bark of this tree is used for 
dye. 
M 
Madhuca. IJlipi butter tree. Bossia Latifolia. 
Madhura. Perennial Jasmine. 
Mallika. Evening Jasmine. 
Mango. Mangifera Indica. 
N 
Narcal Grass. A species of reed. Phragmites Karka Trin. 
Nimba. Acadirachta Indica. A tree with bitter fruits, the leaves 
of which are chewed at funerals. 
Nipa. A species of Kedumbra tree, g. v. Naudea Cadamba. 
P 
Padmaka. A kind of fir. 
Palasa or Palasha. Bread fruit. Butea Frondosa. 
Panasa. Arto Carpus Intcgrifolia. 
Pataia. Tropical evergreen climbing plant. 
Pippala. Ficus Religiosa. Sacred Fig Tree. 
Piyala. Chrongua. 
Plaksha. Ficus Xnfectoria. Waved-leaf fig tree. 
Q 
R 
Sala or Shaia Tree. Sal tree. Shorea Robusta. 
Sallaka. Gum tree. Bignonia Indica. 
Sarpat Grass. One of the sugar canes. Saccharium Bengalense 
Retz. (S. Sara Roxb.) 
SOLEA. A large bamboo. Cephalostashyum Capitatum Munro. 
Shingsapa. An Ashoka, q. v. Dattergia Sisu. 
Tala. A kind of palm, Borassus Flabellifbrmis. 
Tilaka. A tree with beautiful flowers similar to the Sesamum 
plant. 
Tindura. Persimmon. 
TlNlSHA, A climber with purple or white flowers, 
429 
GLOSSARY 
U 
V 
Vadri. (See Badri.) 
Vakana. Sacred medicinal tree. Crataeva Tapia. 
Vetra. Ornamental palm. 
Vf.ttas. Rattan cane. Calamus rotamg. L. 
Vijaka. Citron tree. 
W 
X 
Y 
Z 
THE 
RAMAYANA 
OF 
VALMIKI 
Translated by 
HARI PRASAD SHASTRI 
Vol. II. 
ARANYA KANDA 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
SUNDARA KANDA 
SHANTI SAD AN 
29 Chepstow Villas 
LONDON, W . 1 1 
•957 
Hari Prasad Shastri began the translation of the Ramayana 
of Rishi Valmiki about 1945, and he completed the work in 
1948. The task of editing the translation, proof reading and 
compiling the Glossaries has been entrusted to some of his 
students, and the first of the three volumes was published in 
1952 and was favourably received by the critics. A generous 
recognition on the part of the Government of India brought 
a grant towards the publication cost of the second and third 
volumes which is hereby gratefully acknowledged. 
The second volume of the Ramayana closely follows the 
pattern of Volume 1 except that it has been decided to dispense 
with footnotes so far as possible, and to expand the Glossaries. 
The English equivalent of all Sanscrit words will be found in 
these, although the names of some trees have not been traced. 
The preparation of the manuscript of the third and last 
volume is well advanced and publication is planned for next 
year. 
Shahti Sadan, 
1957- 
CONTENTS 
Book III— Akanya Kanda 
CHAPTER PAGE 
1. Rama is welcomed by the Sages of the Dandaka Forest 3 
2. The Demon Viradha carries off Sita - 4 
3. The Struggle between Viradha and the two Brothers 6 
4. Rama and Lakshmana slay the Demon Viradha 8 
5. The Meeting with the Sage Sharabhanga and his Ascent 
to Brahmaloka -------- 10 
6. The Sages seek the protection of Rama - - - 13 
7. The Meeting between Rama and Sutikshna - - - 15 
8. Rama takes leave of Sutikshna 17 
9. Sita implores Rama not to attack the Titans - - 18 
10. Rama reminds Sita of his promise to the Ascetics - 20 
11. Rama visits the different Retreats and hears of Agastya 22 
12. Agastya receives Rama into his Hermitage 27 
13. Rama goes to Panchavati on the advice of Agastya - 30 
14. Jatayu reveals his Lineage to Rama 31 
15. Rama takes up his Abode in Panchavati 34 
16. Description of Winter by Lakshmana 36 
17. The arrival of Shurpanakha at the Hermitage 38 
18. The Mutilation of Shurpanakha ----- 40 
19. Shurpanakha tells her brother Khara of her disfigurement 42 
20. Rama slays the Demons sent by Khara 44 
21. Shurpanakha urges Khara to fight Rama 46 
22. Khara and his fourteen thousand Demons march against 
Rama ----------47 
23. The Titan Army advances amid evil Portents - - 49 
24. The Combat opens between Rama and the Titans - 51 
25. The Fight continues --------53 
26. Rama destroys the Titans and slays Dushana 56 
27. Rama and Trishiras meet in Combat. Trishiras is slain 58 
28. The Combat between Rama and Khara 59 
29. Rama and the demon Khara taunt one another - - 61 
30. The Death of Khara 63 
31. Ravana, the King of the Titans, hears of the Death of 
Khara and determines to slay Rama 65 
32. Shurpanakha upbraids Ravana and urges him to destroy 
Rama ----------68 
33. Shurpanakha's Speech to Ravana ----- 70 
34. She urges Ravana to slay Rama and wed Sita 71 
35. Ravana visits the Demon Maricha once again 73 
CONTENTS 
CHAPTER PAGE 
36. Ravana reveals his Project to him ----- 76 
37. Maricha seeks to dissuade Ravana from his Design - 78 
38. Maricha describes his first Encounter with Rama - 79 
39. Maricha again seeks to dissuade Ravana from pursuing 
his Design ---------82 
40. Ravana's Wrath ---------83 
41. Further Counsels of Maricha to Ravana 85 
42. Maricha, assuming the form of a Deer, goes to Rama's 
Hermitage --------- 86 
43. Sita is enamoured of the Fawn ----- 88 
44. Rama slays Maricha --------91 
45. Sita sends Lakshmana to Rama's Assistance 93 
46. Ravana approaches Sita ------- 95 
47. The Conversation of Ravana and Sita 98 
48. Sita defies Ravana -------- 101 
49. Sita's Abduction by Ravana ------ 102 
50. Jatayu attacks Ravana ------- 105 
51. The Combat between Jatayu and Ravana - - - 107 
52. Jatayu being slain, Ravana resumes his Flight - - 109 
53. Sita censures Ravana __.-___ na 
54. Ravana returns to Lanka with Sita - - - - 114 
55. Ravana implores Sita to become his Consort - - 116 
56. Sita is guarded by the Titan Women - - - - 118 
57. Rama sees terrible Portents ------ 120 
58. Rama's Lament ---------122 
59. Rama reproaches Lakshmana ------ 123 
60. The Search for Sita -------- 125 
6r. Rama's Plaint --------- 128 
62. His Despair ._--___-- 130 
63. He continues to lament ------- 131 
64. Rama's Wrath --------- 133 
65. Lakshmana seeks to pacify Rama ----- 137 
66. Lakshmana seeks to inspire Rama with Courage - 138 
67. Rama encounters Jatayu ------- 140 
68. Jatayu's Death ___-_---- 142 
69. Rama and Lakshmana meet Ayomukhi and Kabandha 144 
70. Rama and Lakshmana sever the Arms of Kabandha - 147 
71. Kabandha relates bis History ------ 149 
72. Kabandha tells Rama how to find Sita - - - -151 
73. Kabandha's Advice to Rama ------ 153 
74. Rama visits Shabari -------- 156 
75. Rama reaches the Lake Pampa ----- 158 
CONTENTS 
Book IV— Kishkindha Kanda 
CHAPTER PAGE 
i. Rama describes the Spring and the Sentiments it evokes 
in him ---------- 163 
2. Sugriva sends Hanuman to interview Rama - - - 171 
3. Hanuman 's Meeting with Rama ----- 173 
4. Hanuman brings Rama and Lakshmana into the 
Presence of Sugriva - - - - - - -175 
5. The Alliance between Rama and Sugriva - - - 177 
6. Sugriva shows Rama Sita's Cloak and Jewels - - 180 
7. Sugriva consoles Rama - - - - - - -181 
8. Sugriva implores Rama for his help against Bali - 183 
9. The Story of Bali and Mayavi - - - - - 186 
10. The Origin of Bali's Hatred of Sugriva - 187 
11. Sugriva tells Rama of Bali's Exploits - - - - 189 
12. The Fight between Bali and Sugriva - 195 
13. The Hermitage of the Saptajanas ----- 198 
14. Surgriva again challenges his Brother to fight - - 200 
15. Tara's Advice to Bah' ------- 201 
16. Rama inflicts a mortal Wound on Bali - - - 204 
17. Bali reproaches Rama ------- 206 
18. Rama answers Bali -------- 210 
19. Tara's Grief ----------215 
20. Her Lamentations - - - - - - - -217 
21. Hanuman's Speech - 219 
22. Bali's last Words --------- 220 
23. Tara weeps over the Body of Bali ----- 222 
24. Sugriva's Remorse -------- 224 
25. BaG's Funeral Rites 228 
26. Sugriva is installed as King ------ 231 
27. Rama describes Prasravana ------ 234 
28. Rama describes the Rainy Season ----- 237 
29. Hanuman urges Sugriva to honour his Promise - - 242 
30. Description of Autumn ------- 244 
31. Lakshmana goes to Kishkindha ----- 251 
32. Hanuman's Speech -------- 254 
33. Tara pacifies Lakshmana ------- 256 
34. Lakshmana reproaches Sugriva ----- 261 
35. Tara defends Sugriva -------- 262 
36. Lakshmana is reconciled to Sugriva - 264 
37. Sugriva assembles his Troops ------ 265 
38. Sugriva goes to meet Rama ------ 267 
CONTENTS 
CHAPTER PAGE 
39. The arrival of Sugriva's Forces ----- 270 
40. Sugriva sends his Monkeys to the East in search of Sita 272 
41. He sends other Monkeys to explore the Southern Region 276 
42. Searchers are sent to the Western Region - 279 
43. Other Monkeys are sent to the Northern Region - 282 
44. Rama gives his Ring to Hanuman ----- 286 
45. The Departure of the Monkeys ----- 287 
46. Sugriva narrates his Travels through the World - - 288 
47. The Return of the Monkeys ------ 290 
48. Angada slays an Asura ------- ypi 
49. The Monkeys search the Southern Region in vain - 292 
50. Hanuman and his Companions enter the Rikshabila 
Cavern ---------- 293 
51. The Tale of the Ascetic ------- 296 
52. Swaymprabha frees the Monkeys from the cave - - 297 
53. Angada and his Companions consider what course to 
adopt ---------- 299 
54. Hanuman seeks to discourage Angada from his Design 301 
55. The Monkeys decide to die of Hunger - - - - 303 
56. The Intervention of Sampati ------ 304 
57. Angada's Narrative -------- 306 
58. Sampati tells the Monkeys of Ska's place of Concealment 307 
59. He encourages them to pursue their Quest - - - 309 
60. The Story of the Ascetic Nishakara - - - - 31 1 
61. Sampati tells his Story to the Sage - - - -313 
62. Sampati learns from him where Sita is - - - - 314 
63. The Wings of Sampati grow once more - - - 315 
64. The Monkeys are discouraged on seeing the Ocean - 316 
65. The Leaders of the Monkeys, each state what they are 
able to accomplish - - - - - - -317 
66. Jambavan appeals to Hanuman to sacrifice himself for 
the good of all-------- 319 
67. Hanuman prepares to go to Lanka - 322 
CONTENTS 
Book V— Sundara Kanda 
CHAPTER PAGE 
1. The Departure of Hanuman ------ 327 
2. Hanuman's arrival in Lanka ------ 338 
3. He enters the City -------- 342 
4. He observes the City and its Inhabitants - 345 
5. He ranges the City without rinding Ska - 347 
6. He explores Ravana's Palace ------ 349 
7. Description of the Aerial Chariot Pushpaka - - - 351 
8. Further Description of Pushpaka ----- 353 
9. Hanuman searches the Inner Apartments - - - 354 
10. He perceives Ravana in the midst of his Wives - - 358 
11. Description of the Banqueting Hall - 361 
12. Hanuman becomes despondent ----- 304 
13. Hanuman's Dilemna -------- 365 
14. The Ashoka Grove --------369 
15. Hanuman sees Sita -------- 372 
16. His reflections on seeing Sita ------ 375 
17. Description of the Female Titans guarding Sita - - 377 
18. Ravana goes to the Ashoka Grove - 380 
19. Sita's Grief ---- 382 
20. Ravana begs Sita to wed him - - - - - 383 
21. Sita rejects Ravana with disdain ----- 385 
22. Ravana's Threats --------- 388 
23. The female Titans seek to persuade Sita to wed Ravana 391 
24. Their Menaces --------- 392 
25. Sita gives way to Despair ------- 395 
26. Sita prophesies the Titan's Destruction - - - - 396 
27. Trijata's Dream --------- 398 
28. Sita's Lament ___-___-- 401 
29. Sita observes auspicious Portents ----- 403 
30. Hanuman's Reflections ------- 404 
31. Hanuman praises Rama ------- 406 
32. Sita sees Hanuman -------- 408 
33. Hanuman's Converse with the Princess Sita - - 409 
34. Sita's hesitations on seeing Hanuman - - - - 411 
35. Hanuman makes himself known to Sita - - - 413 
36. Sita questions Hanuman ------- 419 
37. Sita refuses to be rescued by Hanuman ... 422 
38. She gives Hanuman her Jewel ------ 426 
39. Hanuman calms Sita's Fears ------ 430 
40. He takes leave of Sita ------- 433 
CONTENTS 
CHAPTER PAGE 
41. Hanuman destroys the Ashoka Grove - 435 
42. He slays the Kinkaras ------- 43J5 
43. He burns the Temple and Monument - 439 
44. The Death of Jambumalin ------ 441 
45. Hanuman slays the Sons of Havana's Ministers - - 442 
46. He annihilates five Generals and their Forces - - 443 
47. The Death of Aksha -------- 446 
48. Hanuman allows himself to be taken Captive by the 
Titans ---------- 449 
49. His Astonishment on beholding Ravana - - - - 454 
50. Hanuman is questioned by the Titans - - - - 455 
51. His Words ---------- 456 
52. Bibisbana pleads for Hanuman ----- 459 
53. Hanuman is led bound through the City - 461 
54. He sets Fire to Lanka ------- 464 
55. Hanuman's Fears concerning Sita ----- 467 
56. He takes Leave of her ------- 469 
57. The Return of Hanuman - - 472 
58. He recounts his Experiences ------ 475 
59. Hanuman appeals to the Monkeys to rescue Sita - 484 
60. Jambavan rejects Angada's Project - 486 
61. The Devastation of Madhuvana ----- 488 
62. The Fight between Dadhimuka and the Intruders - 489 
63. Dadhimuka relates how Madhuvana has been laid waste 491 
64. Sugriva consoles Rama ------- 493 
65. Hanuman tells Rama of his Meeting with Sita - - 496 
66. Rama's Grief --------- 498 
67. Hanuman describes his Interview with Sita - 499 
68. He repeats his Words of Consolation to Sita - - 501 
Glossaries ---------- 505 
BOOK III 
A R ANY A K.ANDA 
CHAPTER I 
Rama is welcomed by the Sages of the Dandaka Forest 
Entering the vast Dandaka Forest, the invincible Rama, 
master of his senses, saw a circle of huts belonging to the 
ascetics, strewn with bark and kusha grass, blazing with spiritual 
effulgence scarce to be borne by mortal eye, as the noonday 
sun is a source of torment to men. 
This retreat, a haven to all beings, the ground of which was 
carefully tended, was frequented by many deer and multitudes 
of birds and rendered gay by the dancing of troops of apsaras. 
Beautiful with its spacious huts, where the sacred fire burnt, 
surrounded by ladles and other articles of worship such as 
skins, kusha grass, fuel, jars of water, fruit and roots ; encircled 
by great and sacred forest trees, bowed with the weight of 
ripe and delectable fruits, the whole hermitage was hallowed 
by sacrificial offerings and libations and re-echoed to the 
recitation of Vedic hymns. 
Carpeted with flowers of every kind, possessing pools 
covered with lotuses, it had been the retreat of former hermits, 
who subsisted on fruit and roots and who, wearing robes of 
bark and black antelope skins, their senses fully controlled, 
resembled the sun or fire. Now great and pious sages, practising 
every austerity, added to its lustre. Resembling the abode of 
Brahma, that hermitage resounded with the chanting of Vedic 
hymns, and brahmins, versed in the Veda, adorned it with 
their presence. 
Beholding that sacred place, the illustrious Raghava, un stringing his bow, entered, and the august sages, possessed of 
spiritual knowledge, highly gratified, advanced to meet him. 
Seeing that virtuous one, resembling the rising moon, with 
Lakshmana and Vaidehi of dazzling beauty, those ascetics of 
rigid vows received them with words of welcome and the 
3 b 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
dwellers in the wood were astonished at Rama's handsome 
mien, his youthful appearance, majesty and graceful attire and, 
struck with wonder, gazed unwinkingly on Raghava, Lakshmana 
and Vaidehi, as on a great marvel. 
Then, those blessed sages, engaged in the welfare of all 
beings, conducted Rama to a leaf-thatched hut, where, offering 
him the traditional hospitality, those fortunate and pious men, 
resembling fire itself, brought water that he might wash his 
hands and feet. Experiencing great delight, those high-souled 
ascetics, bidding him welcome, gathered flowers, fruit and 
roots, placing the whole content of the hermitage at the disposal 
of that magnanimous hero. 
Thereafter, those ascetics, versed in the sacred lore, with 
joined palms addressed him, saying: — 
" O Raghava, a king is the defender of the rights of his 
people and their refuge; he is worthy of all honour and respect, 
he wields the sceptre, he is the Guru and partakes of a fourth 
part of the glory of Indra ; he enjoys the highest prerogatives 
and receives every homage. We, being under thy dominion, 
should be protected by thee, whether living in the capital or 
the forest ; thou art our Sovereign, O Master of the World ! 
" Having renounced all desire for revenge, subdued anger and 
mastered our senses, do thou protect us in the practice of 
virtue, as a mother protects the infant at her breast." 
With these words they paid reverence to Rama, who was 
accompanied by Lakshmana, offering him fruit, roots, flowers 
and every product of field and forest, whilst other ascetics, 
resembling the fire in lustre, observers of sacred vows, honoured 
the Lord according to tradition. 
CHAPTER 2 
The Demon Viradha carries off Sita 
Having received the homage of the ascetics, at dawn Rama 
paid obeisance to them and followed by Lakshmana, entered 
the forest, which abounded in every kind of deer and was 
frequented by bears and tigers. 
4 
ARANYA KANDA 
There, trees, creepers and shrubs had been trampled under foot, so that the paths were barely distinguishable and the 
reflection from the pools and lakes was dazzling ; no birds 
sang in that whole demesne, which was filled with the humming 
of crickets.1 
Followed by Lakshmana, Rama searched the depths of the 
forest with his gaze and in that wood, abounding in ferocious 
beasts, Kakutstha, accompanied by Sita, beheld a titan as 
large as a mountain creating a great uproar. 
Of formidable aspect, hideous, deformed, his eyes sunk deep 
in his forehead, with a vast mouth and protruding belly, clad 
in a tiger skin, covered with blood and loathsome to look upon, 
he struck terror into the hearts of all beings ; it appeared as 
if death itself were approaching with open jaws. 
Three lions, four tigers, two leopards, four dappled deer 
and the head of a great elephant with its tusks, from which 
the fat ran down, hung from his spear. 
Seeing Rama, Lakshmana and Sita, the Princess of Mithila, 
he rushed upon them in fury, like Time8 at the destruction of 
the worlds. Then, creating a great uproar, causing the earth 
to tremble, he seized Vaidehi in his arms and began to carry 
her away, saying : — 
" O Ye, wearing matted locks, clad in robes of bark, accom panied by a common consort, ye are about to die ! Entering 
the Dandaka Forest, armed with weapons, bows and spears, 
whence have ye come, O Ascetics and why do ye dwell here 
in the company of a woman ? Perverse and evil wretches, who 
are ye, bringing disrepute on the sages ? 
I am the Titan Viradha, this is my retreat and I roam the 
impenetrable forest, armed with weapons, feeding on the flesh 
of ascetics. This woman of lovely limbs shall become my 
wife and, in combat, I will drink the blood of ye both, O 
Miscreants 1 " 
The daughter of Janaka, Sita, hearing the cruel and arrogant 
speech of the wicked-hearted Viradha, rilled with dread, began 
to tremble like a palm shaken by the wind. 
1 The Commentaor explains that all this destruction was due to the presence 
of the demon Viradha and that the birds had deserted the place in fear of him. 
* Time in the form of Death, the Destroyer. 
5 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Rama, seeing Viradha bearing the lovely Sita away, growing 
pale, said to Lakshmana : — 
" O Friend, behold the daughter of Janaka, my chaste 
consort, an illustrious princess, reared in luxury, held fast in 
the arms of Viradha ! Alas ! Kaikeyi's desire has been fulfilled 
to-day ! O Lakshmana, the enthronement of her son did not 
suffice that designing woman, since she caused me to be banished 
to the forest despite the love my subjects bore me. Now she 
who reigns supreme in the midst of our mothers will be satisfied! 
That another should have laid hands on Vaidehi is the greatest 
of my misfortunes, worse even than the death of my sire or 
the loss of my kingdom, O Saumitri ! " 
Hearing the words of Kakutstha, Lakshmana, his eyes 
streaming with tears, hissing like a wounded snake, said 
harshly : — 
" O Kakutstha, O Protector of All Beings, who art equal 
to Indra himself, since I am thy servant, why dost thou lament 
as though thou hadst no defender ? 
" Pierced by the shaft I am about to loose in my wrath, the 
Titan Viradha will die and the earth drink his blood. The 
bitterness, I felt towards Bharata for his desiring the throne, 
X shall expend on Viradha, as the God who bears the thunder bolt discharges it at a mountain! With all the strength of 
mine arm, letting fly this sharp arrow, I shall pierce his breast! 
May he yield up his life and fall rolling on the earth ! " 
chapter 3 
The Struggle between Viradha and the two Brothers 
Thereafter Viradha spoke again, filling the forest with his 
voice : — 
" Who are ye, where are ye going, answer me ! " 
Then the illustrious Rama answered that titan, whose 
countenance was inflamed with anger, saying : — 
" Know us to be two warriors of the race of Ikshwaku, 
6 
ARANYA KANDA 
fixed in our vows, wandering in the forest ; but now we would 
know who thou art, roaming here and there in the thickets ? " 
Thereupon Viradha said to Rama, whose strength was 
truth:— 
" Hear and I will tell thee, O Prince of the House of Raghu ! 
I am the son of Java and my mother is Satarhada. I am 
known among the titans throughout the world as Viradha. 
Having gratified Brahma by my penances, I obtained a boon 
and was rendered invulnerable to any weapon on earth ; it is 
impossible to slay me by the use of arms ! 
" Forsaking this fair one, do ye, renouncing all hope, without 
turning back, go hence without delay and I will grant you 
your lives ! " 
Then Rama, his eyes red with anger, answered that hideous 
demon, the wicked Viradha, saying : — 
" Wretch that thou art, cursed be thine evil design ; assuredly 
thou art courting death, verily thou shalt find it in combat ; 
stay but an instant and thou shalt not escape alive ! " 
Bending his bow and speedily placing two sharp arrows on 
it, Rama struck that demon with his pointed shafts and there after, stretching the cord tight, he loosed seven swift arrows, 
adorned with feathers and tipped with gold, equal in night 
to Suparna and Anila. 
Having pierced the body of Viradha, those fiery shafts, 
decorated with heron's plumes, fell to the ground hissing and 
stained with blood. 
On receiving those wounds, Viradha loosed his hold on 
Vaidehi and brandishing his spear in fury hurled himself on 
Rama and on Lakshmana who accompanied him. Letting 
forth a mighty roar, grasping his spear, like unto the 
standard of Indra, his jaws wide open, he resembled death 
itself. 
Then the two brothers rained a volley of flaming arrows on 
Viradha, who resembled time, death or fate, but that terrible 
demon, bursting into loud laughter, halting and opening his 
jaws, threw up those pointed arrows by virtue of the boon he 
had received. Restraining his breath and brandishing his 
spear, the demon Viradha again rushed on the two descendants 
of Raghu, whereupon Rama, the most skilful of warriors, with 
7 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
two arrows cut off that spear, which shone like lightning and 
resembled a flame in the sky. 
Shattered by Rama's shafts, the spear fell to the ground, 
like a rocky ledge split by lightning. Thereat, unbuckling 
their swords, those warriors swiftly fell on Viradha like two 
black serpents, striking him heavily again and again. 
Though hard beset, their formidable opponent beat them 
off vigorously with his fists, but they stood firm, whereupon 
he sought to lift them from the ground and Rama, guessing 
his intention, said to Lakshmana : — 
" Let the demon carry us along the path as far as he wishes, 
O Saumitri ! Allow this Prowler of the Night to bear us 
according to his whim, since he is proceeding along our way." 
Thereupon, the demon, proud of his strength, with great 
energy lifted them up and placed them on his shoulders like 
two striplings ; then having set the two descendants of Raghu 
on his shoulders, the demon Viradha, Ranger of the Night, 
emitting a great roar, strode off into the forest. 
Entering that forest, abounding in trees of every kind, where 
diverse birds filled the air with their song and which was 
thronged with jackals, beasts and serpents, he resembled a 
great cloud. 
CHAPTER 4 
Rama and Lakshmana slay the Demon Viradha 
Seeing the two brothers, the glory of the House of Raghu, 
being borne away, Sita, lifting up her arms, began to cry aloud, 
reflecting thus : — 
* Rama, the son of Dasaratha, who is truthful, virtuous and 
guileless, is being carried away by a demon of terrifying aspect; 
I shall become a prey to bears, tigers and panthers ! ' 
Thinking thus, she cried out : — " O Foremost of Demons, 
I beg of thee, take me and spare those two descendants of 
Raghu ! " 
Hearing Vaidehi's words, Rama and Lakshmana, full of 
valour, prepared to slay that wicked wretch, whereupon 
8 
ARANYA KANDA 
Saumitri broke the left arm of that redoubtable demon and 
Rama the right; thereafter, that titan, resembling a mass of 
cloud, his arms broken, growing weak, suddenly fell to the 
ground unconscious, like a mountain struck by lightning. 
Then the two brothers beat the demon with their fists and 
feet and picking him up, again hurled him to the ground; 
yet, though struck by innumerable arrows and wounded by 
their swords, the demon did not die. 
Perceiving it to be impossible to slay that giant, like unto 
a mountain, the blessed Rama, the refuge of all who are in 
peril, spoke thus : — 
" By virtue of his penances, O Tiger among Men, this 
demon cannot be overcome in combat by weapons, let us 
therefore cast him into a pit. O Lakshmana, as if for a great 
elephant, do thou dig a pit in the forest for this demon of 
formidable size.*' 
Having thus commanded Lakshmana saying : — " Dig a pit ", 
the valiant Rama stood with his foot on the neck of the demon. 
Hearing those words, the demon in humble accents addressed 
that descendant of Raghu, that Bull among Men, saying : — 
" O Lion among Heroes, under the blows of a warrior 
whose strength equals that of Indra, I am dying. In mine 
ignorance, I did not recognize thee, O Lion amongst Men ! 
I see now that thou an the noble son of Kaushalya. O Dear 
Child, thou art Rama and this is the fortunate Vaidehi and the 
illustrious Lakshmana. 
" Through a curse, I had to assume the monstrous shape of 
a titan, but in reality I am the Gandharva Tumburu, who 
incurred the wrath of Kuvera. That glorious God, being 
propitiated by me, said : — ' When Rama, the son of Dasaratha, 
overcomes thee in fight, then, assuming thy natural form, thou 
shalt return to the celestial region.' Owing to my lack of 
reverence for him, in anger the Lord Kuvera had denounced me 
for having conceived an attachment for the nymph, Rambha. 
By thy grace, I am delivered from this terrible curse and shall 
now return to mine abode. All hail to thee, O Scourger of 
thy Foes! 
" O Dear Child, not far from here, at approximately four and 
half miles distance, dwells the virtuous Sharabhanga, a mine 
9 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
of austerity, a great and mighty rishi, effulgent as the sun. 
Go there, without delay; he will give thee most excellent 
counsel! 
Having buried me in a pit, O Rama, go thy way in peace ! 
Those demons who are about to die must according to a fixed 
law be buried in a pit." 
Having spoken thus to Kakutstha, the courageous Viradha, 
pierced by many arrows, leaving bis body, ascended to heaven.1 
Then Raghava said to Lakshmana : — " Dig a pit for this 
demon of dreadful deeds, as for a great elephant in the forest." 
Having spoken thus to Lakshmana saying * Dig a pit ! ', Rama 
who was endowed with great prowess, remained standing with 
his foot on the head of Viradha. 
Then Lakshmana, taking up a pick, dug a great pit by the 
side of the demon, whose ears resembled conches and threw 
him into it, he letting forth dreadful shrieks the while. 
Finding they were unable to kill that great titan with their 
sharp weapons, those two lions among men, having employed 
all their ingenuity, put an end to Viradha by burying him in 
the pit. 
Viradha himself, a ranger of the forest, desiring to die at 
Rama's hands, had indicated to him how he should proceed, 
saying : — " I cannot be slain by weapons." 
Hearing this, the idea had come to Rama to fling him into 
a pit, and while being cast into it, that all-powerful demon 
caused the forest to resound with his cries. 
Having thrown Viradha into the pit, Rama and Lakshmana, 
their fears removed, rejoiced in that forest, like the sun and 
moon in the firmament. 
CHAPTER 5 
The Meeting with the Sage Sharabhanga and his Ascent 
to Brahmaloka 
Having slain the mighty and terrible Viradha in the forest, 
the valiant Rama embraced Sita and comforted her; then 
addressing the resplendent Lakshmana, he said : — 
1 The following passages clearly indicate the resumption of the narrative on 
a later occasion. 
ARANYA KANDA 
" This impenetrable forest is dangerous and we are not its 
natural inhabitants; let us therefore seek out the Sage Shara bhanga without delay." 
Raghava then turned his steps towards Sharabhanga's 
hermitage and, approaching that Sage, whose soul was purified 
by renunciation, he observed a great marvel. 
In the sky, he beheld India, gorgeously attired in robes free 
from any particle of dust, his body shining like the sun or fire, 
mounted on a splendid chariot, followed by all the Celestials 
and innumerable high-souled sages like unto himself, who 
served as his escort. Bay horses were yoked to that aerial car, 
that shone like the rising sun and, luminous as the moon's disc, 
resembled a mass of white clouds. 
Rama also observed an immaculate canopy with magnificent 
garlands and marvellous fans made of yaks' tails with handles 
of gold of great price, which two women of rare beauty, waved 
to and fro over the head of that God, whilst Gandharvas, 
Immortals, Celestial Beings and great Rishis, paid homage to 
him with sublime chants, as he hovered in space. 
Seeing Shatakratu conversing with the Sage Sharabhanga, 
Rama pointed out the chariot to his brother and bade him 
gaze on the marvellous sight. 
He said : — " O Lakshmana, dost thou behold that dazzling 
car of great brilliance shining like the sun in the skies ? With out doubt, these are the celestial bay horses of Indra of whom 
we have heard, who travels through space and who is constantly 
invoked at the time of sacrifice. Those youthful warriors 
wearing earrings, who in groups of hundreds, with swords in 
their hands, stand round him in the sky, with their broad 
chests and strong arms resembling maces, clad in magnificent 
purple, look like fierce tigers. On their breasts, gleam rows 
of pearls, and those lions among men, of handsome mien, 
appear to be twenty-five years old which is the age at which 
the Gods ever remain, O Saumitri. Tarry here a moment, 
O Lakshmana, so that I may discover who this great hero in 
the chariot really is." 
Having uttered the words ' Tarry here ' to Saumitri, 
Kakutstha advanced towards the hermitage of Sharab THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Seeing Rama approaching, the Lord of Sachi, taking leave 
of the sage, said to the Gods : — 
" Rama is coming hither, take me to mine abode *ere he 
addresses me ; later he shall behold me ! When he returns 
victorious, having fulfilled his purpose, I shall readily show 
myself to him. It is for him to perform a great exploit 
impossible for any other to accomplish." 
Thereafter, offering salutations to the ascetic, in all humility, 
the God who bears the thunderbolt, the Scourge of his Foes, 
ascended to heaven in his chariot, harnessed with horses. 
When the God of a Thousand Eyes had departed, Raghava 
rejoined his consort and his brother and together they 
approached Sharabhanga, who was seated before the sacred 
fire. Embracing his feet, Rama, Sita and Lakshmana, on his 
invitation, seated themselves in the place assigned to them. 
Questioned by Raghava concerning Indra's visit, Shara bhanga related everything to him. 
He said : — 
" O Rama, that magnanimous God wished to conduct me 
to Brahmaloka, the region I have attained by the merit of my 
penances, which is inaccessible to those who are not masters 
of themselves. 
" Seeing thee approaching, know well, O Foremost of Men, 
that I had no desire to enter Brahmaloka *ere I had enjoyed 
thy gende presence in my hermitage. O Lion among Men, 
O Virtuous and Magnanimous Prince, having had intercourse 
with thee, I shall ascend first to the three lower heavens and 
thereafter to the highest. These worlds of unsurpassed 
beauty that have been conquered by me, these sublime abodes 
of Brahma, that are mine by right, do thou accept, O Lion 
among Men ! " 
Hearing the words of the Rishi Sharabhanga, Raghava, that 
lion among men, versed in the Shastras, answered : — 
" I also have conquered all the worlds, O Great Ascetic, 
but in obedience to my vow I desire to remain in the forest." 
Thus addressed by Raghava, whose might was equal to 
Indra's, the eminently sagacious Sharabhanga spoke again, 
saying: — 
" O Rama, the illustrious and virtuous Sutikshna lives in 
ARANYA KANDA 
this forest; that saint will tell thee what is best for thee to do. 
"Follow the river Mandakini, that stream which is covered 
with a carpet of flowers, and thou wilt reach his dwelling place. 
There is the path, O Tiger among Men, but stay with me a 
moment yet, till I abandon this body as a snake casts off its 
Thereafter, having prepared a fire and poured clarified 
butter therein, Sharabhanga, that sage of supreme merit, 
entered the flames to the accompaniment of sacred formulas. 
The hair of the magnanimous one was consumed together 
with his wrinkled skin, his bones, his flesh and his blood, 
whereupon, assuming a youthful and splendid appearance, 
Sharabhanga rose from the pyre like a flame. 
Traversing the region where the sacrificial fires are tended 
by high-souled sages, as well as that of the Gods, he ascended 
to Brahma's abode. 
That foremost of Rishis, of purified karma, there beheld the 
Grandsire of the World with those attendant on him, who, 
seeing that sage, addressed him, saying : — " Thou art 
welcome ! " 
CHAPTER 6 
The Sages seek the protection of Rama 
Sharabhanga having ascended to heaven, the assembled 
ascetics presented themselves before Rama, the offspring of 
Kakutstha of flaming energy, and among them were those 
who had sprung from the nails and the hair of Brahma's body, 
also from the water in which his feet were bathed ; there were 
those who lived on the moon's rays ; those who subsisted on 
milled grain; those who did penance by standing in water; 
those who slept on the naked ground ; those who lived in the 
open air the whole year round ; those who subsisted on water 
and wind alone ; those who never sought the shade ; those 
1 Five Fires. — Four fires and the sun overhead. See Glossary also under 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
who underwent long fasts ; those who practised uninterrupted 
repetition of prayer j those who gave themselves up to perpetual 
penance J those who dwelt on the summit of high mountains ; 
those who had subdued their senses and those who lived 
between five fires.1 
All these sages, fixed in Yoga, endowed with the powers of 
Brahma, gathered in Sharabhanga's hermitage in order to 
approach Rama. 
Those virtuous companies of Rishis, having assembled there, 
addressed Rama, Foremost of the Good, who was conversant 
with his supreme duty, saying : — 
" O Lord of the House of Ikshwaku and of the whole world, 
Warrior of the Great Car, thou art our defender and leader, 
as Maghavan is of the Gods. 
*' Thou art famed in the Three Worlds for thy valour and 
glory ! Filial devotion, justice and faith find their consum mation in thee, O Lord. It behoves thee, who art cognisant 
with virtue, to pardon our temerity in approaching thee in 
order to make our supplication. 
" It were a signal defect for a king to receive one-sixth of the 
revenue of his people, if he did not protect them as his own 
sons. Should he however defend those who inhabit his 
kingdom as his own life or as the lives of his offspring, to 
whom he is ever devoted, he will occupy an exalted position 
in the region of Brahma. 
" The supreme blessedness acquired by those ascetics who 
live on roots and fruit is not equal to a quarter of that attained 
by the monarch who governs his subjects according to the law. 
" Do thou become the defender of those countless brahmins 
who live in the forest who are without a protector, and so 
defend them from the cruel persecution of the titans. 
" Come and behold the bodies of innumerable ascetics of 
pure heart, who have been slaughtered in diverse ways in the 
forest by titans. 
" They have inflicted great carnage amongst the people who 
dwell on Lake Fampa, by the river Mandakini and on Chittrakuta. 
We are no longer able to endure the terrible plight of these 
sages, brought about in the forest by those titans of cruel 
deeds ; therefore we take refuge in thee ; protect us, O Rama, 
14 
ARANYA KANDA 
against those Prowlers of the Night, who seek our destruction. 
We have no asylum on earth but thee, O Valiant Prince ; 
do thou save us from the titans." 
Having listened to the sages, the virtuous Kakutstha answered 
them, who were rich in heavy penances, saying : — 
" Do not entreat me thus ; am I not the servant of the sages ? 
It is solely to fulfil my duty, that I have entered the forest. 
It is in order to deliver you from the oppression of the titans 
and to carry out the commands of my sire that I am here. 
It is in your interest and for your happiness that I have come 
here of mine own will. 
" My sojourn in the forest will be greatly to your advantage ; 
I shall slay the titans, the enemies of the ascetics. Let the 
sages witness my prowess in combat and my brother's also, 
O Rishis ! " 
Having yielded to the entreaty of the ascetics, that hero, 
firm in his duty, accompanied by Lakshmana, directed his 
course towards the hermitage of Sutikshna, followed by the 
sages, who paid him every honour. 
CHAPTER 7 
The Meeting between Rama and Sutikshna 
Rama, the Scourge of his Foes, accompanied by his brother, 
Sita and the sages, approached the hermitage of Sutikshna, and 
having proceeded far and crossed many deep rivers he beheld a 
wonderful mountain as high as Mount Meru. 
Thereafter those two scions of the House of Raghu went 
forward with Sita through a forest filled with many kinds of 
trees and having penetrated into that dense woodland, abound ing in trees laden with flowers and fruit, Rama observed in a 
solitary spot a hermitage decorated with garlands and bark, 
There he beheld the Sage Sutikshna, a mine of asceticism, 
his hair matted, covered with dust, seated in the lotus posture 
and addressed him, saying : — 
" O Blessed One, I am Rama, who have come hither to 
15 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
behold thee. Be gracious enough, O Virtuous and Illustrious 
Rishi, O Essence of Sanctity, to speak to me." 
Seeing Ramachandra, the sage, foremost of the ascetics, 
took him in his arms and addressed him thus : — 
" Be thou welcome, O Best of the Raghus, O Rama, chief of 
virtuous men. Henceforth this hermitage, which thou hast 
entered, has a protector. I have waited for thee, O Illustrious 
Hero, and for this reason did not ascend to the region of the 
Gods, leaving my body here on earth. I had heard that thou, 
being banished from thy kingdom, had gone to Chittrakuta, 
O Kakutstha ! 
" The Chief of the Gods, Shatakratu, came hither and 
approaching me, that mighty King of the Celestials made it 
known to me that I had conquered all the worlds by virtue of 
my good karma. 
" All those blessings acquired by the divine sages through 
asceticism I offer to thee ; do thou enjoy them with thy con sort and Lakshmana." 
To that great and illustrious sage of rigid vows and devout 
speech, Rama, the master of his senses, replied, as Vasava 
addresses Brahma, saying : — 
" O Illustrious Sage, I myself have conquered the worlds ; 
yet in accordance with the command received by me, I have 
elected to dwell in the great forest. ' Thou art possessed of every thing, yet art engaged in the welfare of all beings ', were the 
words of the ascetic Sharabhanga, that Gautama of great soul, 
to me." 
Hearing Rama's words, the great Rishi, renowned throughout 
the world, graciously addressed him, saying : — 
" Do thou live in this hermitage, O Rama, which is pleasant 
and frequented by companies of sages, where one may gather 
roots and fruit in all seasons, where herds of marvellous deer 
gather without injuring any and come and go enchanting all 
with their beauty. No harm is to be encountered here, save 
what the deer bring about." 
Hearing the words of the great Rishi, the elder brother of 
Lakshmana, lifting up his bow and arrows, said : — 
" O Blessed Lord, what could be more unfortunate than 
that I with my bow and sharp burnished arrows should slay 
16 
ARANYA KANDA 
those deer that gather here, and thus give thee pain; for this 
reason I shall not sojourn long in this sanctuary." 
Having spoken thus, Rama became silent and performed his 
evening devotions ; thereafter with Sita and Lakshmana he 
prepared to pass the night in Sutikshna's enchanting hermitage. 
The evening having passed and night fallen, the magnani mous Sutikshna with his own hands distributed hulled grain, 
the traditional food of the ascetics, to those Lions among Men, 
having paid homage to them. 
CHAPTER 8 
Rama takes leave of Sutikshna 
Rama, having been treated with all honour by Sutikshna, 
passed the night in the ashrama with Saumitri, and waking at 
dawn bathed with Sita in the cool waters fragrant with the scent 
of lotuses. 
At the proper time, having duly worshipped Agni and the 
Gods in that forest containing the retreats of the ascetics, 
Rama, Lakshmana and Videha's daughter, observing the sun 
had risen, approached Sutikshna with courtesy, saying : — 
" O Lord, thou hast ministered liberally to us and paid us 
every honour, now we ask leave to depart, since the ascetics 
who accompany us wish us to press on without delay. 
" It is our wish to visit all the retreats inhabited by holy 
men of devout practices in the Dandaka Forest. We therefore 
beg to take leave of these great sages, fixed in their vows, 
purified by penance and resembling clear flames. 
" We desire to go hence 'ere the rays of the sun shine too 
fiercely and become unbearable, like one who has usurped 
royal prerogatives by unlawful means ! " 
Having spoken thus, Raghava with Saumitri and Sita, bowed 
down to the feet of the sage, and that Foremost of Ascetics, 
raising up those two heroes, clasped them affectionately to his 
heart and said :— 
17 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
" Go thy way safely, O Rama, in the company of Saumitri 
and Sita, who follows thee like a shadow. Visit the entrancing 
solitudes of the Dandaka Forest, where those hermits dwell 
whose souls are purified by renunciation. Thou shalt see 
there woods abounding in fruit, roots and flowers, magnificent 
herds of deer, flocks of tame birds, tufts of lotus in bloom, 
tranquil lakes abounding in waterfowl, charming mountain 
springs and splendid cataracts falling from the hills with 
marvellous groves echoing to the peacock's cry. Go, O Child, 
and thou also, Sumitra's son ; then come again to this retreat 
when thou hast seen all." 
Thus addressed, Kakutstha and Lakshmana answered: — 
" Be it so ! " and circumambulating the sage, prepared to 
depart. 
Thereafter the large-eyed Sita handed those brothers their 
excellent quivers, bows and shining swords, and taking leave 
of the great sages the two descendants of the House of Raghu, 
of unsurpassed beauty, fastening on their quivers and bearing 
their bows and swords, swiftly set out with Sita. 
CHAPTER 9 
Sita implores Rama not to attack the Titans 
When her lord, the Joy of the House of Raghu, having obtained 
the permission of Sutikshna was proceeding on his way, Sita, in 
gracious and gentle tones, addressed him saying : — 
" Though thou art noble, a small defect by imperceptible 
degrees becomes great, but it is always possible to eschew 
evil, born of desire. There are three failings, born of desire; 
the first is the uttering of falsehood, but the other two are of 
graver significance, namely, association with another's wife and 
acts of violence committed without provocation. 
" O Raghava, falsehood was never, nor could ever be, thy 
weakness ; nor yet, O Indra among Men, couldst thou, even 
in thought, covet another's wife ; this fault, destructive of 
18 
ARANYA KANDA 
virtue, was never thine, O Son of a King ! Thou hast ever 
centred thine attention on thine own consort ! 
" Thou art righteous, humble and faithful to the commands 
of thy sire ; in thee, justice and integrity flower in their fullness. 
All this is possible to those who have mastered their senses, 
O Long-armed Warrior, and thou art fully self-subdued, O 
Thou of Charming Presence ! 
" The third evil, which through ignorance leads men to bear 
hostility to one another without cause, now shows itself in thee ! 
O Valiant Prince, thou hast vowed to the dwellers of the 
Dandaka Forest, whose defender thou art, to slay the demons 
without mercy, and for this reason, equipped with bows and 
arrows, thou hast set out with thy brother to the forest known 
as Dandaka. Seeing thee advancing thus my mind is rilled 
with apprehension and I am pondering how to act in the most 
profitable manner for thy welfare in this world and the next. 
Thy departure for the Dandaka Forest does not find favour 
with me, O Hero ; I will tell thee the reason. 
" Entering the forest with thy brother, armed with bows and 
arrows, it may well be that, on seeing the titans, thou wilt 
loose thy shafts ! As the proximity of faggots increases the 
violence of the fire, even so does the possession of a bow 
increase the strength and energy of a warrior ! 
" In former times, O Long-armed Prince, in a sacred forest 
frequented by deer and birds, dwelt a devout and virtuous 
ascetic. With the intention of obstructing his austerities, 
Indra, the Lord of Sachi, in the guise of a warrior, went to 
that hermitage, sword in hand. In this retreat, he left that 
excellent sword, requesting the sage, engaged in pious acts, 
to guard it as a trust. Receiving that weapon, he, fully con scious of the charge laid upon him, ranged the forest, carefully 
watching over the sword entrusted to him. Intent on preserving 
it, he ventured nowhere without that sword, either to gather 
fruit and roots or for other reasons. Constantly bearing this 
weapon and neglecting his penances, by degrees, that ascetic 
developed warlike inclinations. In time that foolish hermit, 
carrying the sword, began to enjoy nothing so much as violence 
and, losing his sobriety, was led astray and fell into hell. 
" This, formerly, was the result of bearing arms ! As contact 
19 c 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKZ 
with fire works change in a piece of wood, so the carrying of 
arms works alteration in the mind of him who carries them. 
" From affection and reverence for thee, I draw thine atten tion to this matter. I do not venture to instruct thee. 
Equipped with bows as thou art, I ask thee to renounce all 
thought of slaying the titans in the Dandaka Forest without 
provocation. O Warrior! the world looks askance on those 
who strike without cause. It is the duty of warriors to protect 
those of subdued soul who are in peril. The bearing of arms 
and retirement to the forest, practice of war and the exercise 
of asceticism are opposed to each other; let us therefore 
honour the moral code that pertains to peace. Murderous 
thoughts, inspired by desire for gain, are. born of the handling 
of weapons. When thou dost return to Ayodhya, thou wilt 
be able to take up the duties of a warrior once more. The 
joy of my mother and father-in-law will be complete, if during 
the renunciation of thy kingdom, thou dost lead the life of an 
ascetic. Thus happiness accrues to one who discharges his 
duty ; through performance of one's duty, the whole world is 
conquered, duty constituting its very marrow. It is by the 
complete negation of self that the saints acquired bliss ; happi ness is not born of pleasure ! 
*' O My Friend, with a pure heart fulfil thy duty in solitude; 
thou art conversant with the nature of the Three Worlds. 
" It is through feminine weakness that I speak thus, for 
who would dare to instruct thee in thy duty ? Having reflected 
carefully on what I have said, do what thou considerest best 
without further delay ! " 
CHAPTER 10 
Rama reminds Sita of his Promise to the Ascetics 
Hearing Vaidehi's speech, inspired by conjugal tenderness, 
Rama, his energy enhanced, replied to the daughter of Janaka, 
saying: — 
" O Noble Lady, it is in appropriate words, dictated by 
thine affection, that thou hast sought to instruct me in the 
duties of my caste. 
ARANYA KANDA 
" How shall I answer thee, O Princess ? Thou thyself hast 
said : ' Warriors bear their bows, so that the word "oppression" 
may not be heard on earth.' O Sita, it is on account of those 
ascetics of severe penances, beset with perils in the Dandaka 
Forest, who have sought my protection, that I have come hither. 
Dwelling in the forest at all times, where they live on fruit 
and roots, they are unable to enjoy a peaceful existence on 
account of the titans, O Timid Lady, These hermits of the 
Dandaka Forest are devoured by those terrible demons, who 
live on human flesh. ' Come to our aid * was the cry of those 
excellent Twice-born, and when I heard those words falling 
from their lips, I promised to obey them and answered ' Fear 
not ' ! It was a source of the greatest distress to me to see 
them kneeling at my feet, when it was I who should have 
been touching theirs." 
" ' What do you desire of me ? ' , I enquired of that assembly 
of the Twice-born, whereupon, drawing near, they spoke the 
following words : — 
" * In the Dandaka Forest, innumerable demons, assuming 
different forms, torment us cruelly. O Rama, do thou protect 
us ! The time of the Homa sacrifice and the days of the full 
moon have come, O Irreproachable Prince ! Thou art the 
sure refuge of all the saints and ascetics who harassed by the 
titans seek thy protection. By the power of our asceticism 
it were easy for us to destroy these Rangers of the Night, 
but we are loath to lose the fruits of austerity, earned over 
a long period. 
" 'Prolonged penance is subject to innumerable hindrances, 
and is exceedingly hard, O Rama ! For this reason we refrain 
from pronouncing a curse on these demons, though they 
devour us. Tormented thus by the titans who frequent the 
Dandaka Forest, we implore thee and thy brother to protect 
us; thou art our support.' " 
"Hearing these words, I promised my protection to the 
sages of the Dandaka Forest, O Daughter of Janaka ! 
" As long as I live, therefore, I cannot violate the promise 
given to the ascetics. 
" I may yield up my life or even thee, O Sita, as well as 
Lakshmana, but I cannot be false to a vow made to brahmins. 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
" Even had I not promised them anything, O Vaidehi, it is 
my bounden duty to protect die sages ; how much more so 
now! 
"I am pleased with thee, O Sita, for one does not offer 
advice to those one does not love. Thy words are worthy of 
thee, O Beautiful One. By pursuing die path of duty thou 
hast become dearer to me than life itself." 
Having spoken thus to Sita, the daughter of the King of 
Mithila, the magnanimous Rama, carrying his bow, continued 
to roam through those ravishing solitudes with Lakshmana. 
CHAPTER I I 
Rama visits the different Retreats and hears of Agastya 
Walking ahead, Rama was followed by Sita, while behind her 
came Lakshmana, bow in hand. With Sita, they proceeded 
further, seeing many hills and plains, woods and enchanting 
rivers with geese and cranes frequenting their banks and pools 
covered with lotuses, abounding in waterfowl, and herds of 
deer, horned buffaloes in rut, bears and elephants, the destroyers 
of trees. 
Having travelled a great distance, they beheld, as the sun 
was setting, a marvellous lake, some four miles in length, 
carpeted with lotus and water-lily blooms, graced with herds 
of wild elephants and abounding in geese, swans and teal. 
From this enchanting lake of tranquil waters, the sound of 
singing and musical instruments could be heard, yet no one 
was visible there. Captivated, Rama and Lakshmana began to 
question a sage named Dharmabhrit, saying : — 
" O Great Ascetic, this wonderful music, heard by us all, 
moves us strangely; what can it be? Be gracious enough 
to tell us." 
Thus questioned by Raghava, the magnanimous sage began 
at once to relate the history of that magic lake. 
He said : — " This lake, called Panchapsara,1 is always filled 
1 Panchapsara — ' Lake of Five Apsaras I ' 
ARANYA KANDA 
with water and was created by the penances of the Sage 
Mandarkini. 
" Practising a rigid asceticism, this great sage, lying in water 
for thousands of years, lived on air alone 1 Then the Gods with 
Agni at their head became agitated and, coming together, said 
to each other : — * This sage aspires to our state ! * Thus did 
they speak, their minds full of apprehension. 
" Then all the Gods, in order to destroy the merit of the 
sage acquired through his penances, sent down five of the 
most beautiful nymphs, whose complexion resembled lightning 
and, though the ascetic was fully conversant with what was 
good and evil, he was captivated by those nymphs and fell 
under the sway of the God of Love. 
" These five nymphs became the wives of that sage, who 
constructed a secret dwelling in the lake for them. There they 
live happily, bringing delight to the ascetic, who by virtue of 
his penances has become youthful. They pass their time in 
dalliance and this is the cause of the entrancing music mingling 
with the tinkling of their ornaments." 
Such was the strange tale recounted by that sage of pure soul. 
Conversing thus, the illustrious Rama and his brother 
visited the circle of hermitages, strewn with kusha grass and 
bark, which were resplendent with the lustre of the brahmins. 
Accompanied by Vaidehi and Lakshmana, the Descendant of 
Raghu, Kakutstha penetrated into the blessed circle of those 
Lions among Men. 
Received with delight and honoured by those great rishis, 
Rama roamed through the silent woods, that great warrior 
sojourning with the ascetics, sometimes for ten months, some times for a year, sometimes for four months or five or six 
months, sometimes for many months or a month and a half 
only, sometimes three months and sometimes eight. In this 
way, engaged in innocent pastimes, ten years passed away. 
Having visited all the retreats of the ascetics, Rama returned 
to Sutikshna's hermitage and, receiving the homage of the 
sages, that Subduer of his Foes remained there awhile. 
One day, as he sat at the feet of the ascetic, in all humility 
he addressed him, saying : — 
" O Blessed One, I have heard that Agastya, that foremost 
23 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
of sages, dwells in this forest, but it is so vast, that I do not 
know where his hermitage is to be found. Where does the 
retreat of that sagacious Rishi lie ? By thy favour, O Blessed 
Lord, I, my younger brother and Sita wish to pay our respects 
to him.'' 
Hearing the words of the virtuous Rama, that illustrious sage, 
Sutikshna, well pleased, answered the son of Dasaratha, saying: — 
" It was my intention to speak of this to thee and Lakshmana, 
O Raghava and say : ' Do thou, with Sita, seek out Agastya.' 
Now thou thyself hast proposed it and it is well. I will 
now tell thee, O Rama, where that great Ascetic Agastya dwells. 
" My Quid, four miles from here to the south, thou wilt 
come to the hermitage of the brother of Agastya, situated in 
a fertile plain, covered with charming groves of fig, abounding 
in fruit and flowers, where the song of many birds may be 
heard. Innumerable lakes of tranquil water, carpeted by 
lotuses and frequented by swans, ducks and geese add to its 
beauty. Having passed the night there, do thou at dawn 
follow the path, through a glade, to the south and there thou 
shalt come upon Agastya's retreat, at four miles distance, 
in an enchanting spot planted with lovely trees. This place 
will charm Vaidehi as well as Lakshmana and thee, for this 
corner of the forest shaded by innumerable trees, is ravishing. 
" Shouldst thou desire to visit that great ascetic, Agastya, 
then set out to-day, O Prince of Surpassing Wisdom." 
At these words, Rama with Lakshmana and Sita, having 
made obeisance to Sutikshna, set out to seek the Sage Agastya. 
Enjoying the marvellous woods and hills, which resembled a 
mass of clouds, and the lakes and rivers to be seen on the way, 
Rama proceeded quickly along the path pointed out by the 
sage Sutikshna, and full of delight that magnanimous One 
said to Lakshmana : — 
" Assuredly, this must be the retreat of the illustrious 
brother of Agastya, that sage of blessed karma, that we now 
behold. Observe how along the woodland ride thousands of 
trees, bowed with the weight of their fruit and flowers, can be 
seen, and the pungent odour of ripe figs is borne on the breeze. 
Here and there heaps of fire-wood lie, with darbha grass, the 
colour of lapis lazuli ; see also that column of smoke, like a 
24 
ARANYA KANDA 
plume of dark cloud, rising in the forest from a fire freshly 
lit in the hermitage. 
" Having performed their ablutions in the sacred ponds, the 
Twice-born are offering flowers they themselves have gathered. 
The words spoken by Sutikshna have proved true O Friend. 
Here indeed is the retreat of Agastya's brother. 
" In his desire to be of service to the worlds, by virtue of his 
austerities that great sage overcame death and set apart this 
quarter as a place of refuge. 
" Here formerly the cruel demons Vatapi and Ilvala lived, 
two great asuras who together conceived a plan for slaying the 
brahmins. 
" Assuming the form of a sage, the pitiless Ilvala, using the 
sanskrita language, invited the ascetics to partake of a feast. 
Preparing his brother disguised as a ram in a dish, he fed the 
Twice-born, according to traditional rites. When the ascetics 
had eaten, Ilvala cried out in a loud voice : — * O Vatapi, come 
forth.* 
" At the sound of his voice, Vatapi, bleating like a ram, 
tearing the bodies of the ascetics, emerged. 
" Thus thousands of brahmins were slain by those devourers 
of human flesh, who changed their shape at will and were full 
of deceit. 
" At the request of the Gods, the great Rishi Agastya went 
to the feast and ate up the huge asura, after which Ilvala said: — 
' It is well,' and offering the guest water to wash his hands, 
cried out : — * Come forth O Vatapi ! ' 
" But as this Slayer of Ascetics was speaking thus, Agastya, 
that excellent sage, breaking into laughter, said to him : — 
" ' How can that demon come forth, since I have consumed 
him ? Thy brother in the shape of a ram, has entered the 
abode of Yama.' 
" Hearing that his brother was dead, the demon in anger 
rushed at the ascetic, hurling himself on that Indra of the 
Twice-born, but the sage, blazing with spiritual power, by a 
single glance consumed him, and he perished. 
" This is the hermitage, beautified by lakes and groves, 
belonging to the brother of that sage, who in compassion for 
the ascetics performed that arduous feat." 
25 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
While Rama was speaking thus to Saumitri, the sun set 
behind the mountain and the night drew on ; duly performing 
his evening devotions, he entered the hermitage and offered 
obeisance to the ascetic 
Warmly received by that blessed one, Raghava passed the 
night there, having partaken of fruit and roots and, when 
morning came and the disc of the sun was visible, he paid 
homage to the brother of Agastya, saying : — 
" Reverent Sir, I salute thee and thank thee for the peaceful 
night I have passed here, I will now go and seek out my spiritual 
preceptor, thine elder brother." 
" So be it," replied the sage, whereupon the descendant of 
Raghu went along the path pointed out to him, enjoying the 
forest with the innumerable Nirvara, Panasa, Sala, Vanjula, 
Tinisha, Shiribilwa, Madhuka, Bilwa and Tinduka trees in 
full flower entwined with blossoming creepers, and trees 
ripped by the trunks of elephants, where monkeys disported 
themselves and which resounded to the warbling of a myriad 
birds. 
Then the lotus-eyed Rama said to the valiant and heroic 
Lakshmana, who was following him : — 
" From the glossy foliage of the trees and the lameness of 
the deer and the birds, we are undoubtedly not far distant 
from the retreat of that great and pure-souled Rishi of virtuous 
practices. 
" This hermitage that removes all weariness, belonging to 
the Sage Agastya, well known among men for his virtue, with 
its groves filled with a rare fragrance, its robes of bark and 
garlands hanging here and there, frequented by herds of tame 
deer, the leafy boughs pervaded by countless birds, can now be 
seen by us. 
" Having overcome Mrityu by his power, in his desire to 
do good to the whole world, he created this inviolate refuge in 
the south, which is eschewed by demons who fear to lay it waste, 
" From the day that this region was rendered habitable by 
that virtuous ascetic, the demons have ceased to exercise their 
hatred and cruelty here. This fortunate land of the South, 
famed in the Three Worlds, associated with the name of that 
blessed sage, is no longer haunted by those wicked beings. 
26 
ARANYA KANDA 
" The mountain Vindhya, foremost of its kind, that threatened 
to intercept the rays of the sun, dared not grow higher, 
submitting to Agastya's command and this enchanting retreat, 
frequented by deer, belongs to that long-lived one of exalted 
achievement. The virtuous Agastya, honoured by men, who 
is ever engaged in the welfare of all beings, will on our arrival 
accord us a great welcome. 
" I wish to pay homage to that great ascetic personally and 
to pass the rest of mine exile in the forest with him, O Mild 
One ! Here the Gods, Gandharvas, Siddhas and the great 
Sages, who live on a bare subsistence, constantly pay homage 
to the Sage Agastya, but dishonest, cruel, wicked and perverse 
men are not able to remain in the presence of that great ascetic. 
"The Immortals, however, the Yakshas and those of the 
Serpent Race, the great Rishis also, dedicated to virtuous 
living, dwell here, and fixed in holiness, those exalted beings, 
discarding their worn-out bodies, assuming new ones, ascend 
to heaven in chariots resembling the sun. 
" There the Gods fulfil the desires of the virtuous, granting 
them immortality, divine powers and every degree of majesty. 
" We have now come to the hermitage, O Saumitri, do thou 
enter it and announce my arrival with Sita, to the Rishi." 
CHAPTER 12 
Agastya receives Rama into his Hermitage 
Having entered the hermitage, Lakshmana, the younger 
brother of Raghava, approached a disciple of Agastya and said 
to him : — 
" The eldest son of King Dasaratha, the illustrious Rama, 
has come with his consort, Sita, to pay homage to the sage. 
I am his younger brother, obedient and devoted to him and 
his humble servant ; perchance thou hast heard of us ? 
" We have penetrated into this dangerous forest at the 
command of our royal sire. We three desire to see the blessed 
One, do thou make it known to him." 
27 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Hearing Lakshmana's words, the disciple said : — " So be it ! " 
and went to inform Agastya at the place where the sacred fire 
burned. With joined palms approaching that Foremost of 
Munis whose austerities had rendered him invincible, he 
conveyed the news of Rama's arrival to him. 
In conformity with Lakshmana's words, the cherished 
disciple of Agastya said : — " The two sons of King Dasaratha, 
Rama and Lakshmana, have come to the hermitage with Sita. 
These two warriors, Conquerors of their Foes, have come to 
look on thee and to offer their services ; be gracious enough 
to instruct me in what should now be done ! " 
Having heard from his disciple that Rama, followed by 
Lakshmana and the auspicious Vaidehi, were waiting, Agastya 
answered : — " How fortunate that after so long a time Rama 
has come to see me to-day. It was ever the desire of my 
heart to behold that great prince. Bid Rama welcome and 
ask him to enter together with his consort and Lakshmana who 
accompanies him; let them be brought into my presence; 
why has this not already been done ? " 
Thus addressed by that mighty muni, learned in the spiritual 
tradition, the disciple saluted him with joined palms and said : 
" Be it so ! " Thereafter, issuing from the hermitage, he 
approached Lakshmana and addressed him, saying : — 
" Which of you is Rama ? Let him enter and approach the sage." 
Thereupon Lakshmana, moving nearer to the gateway of the 
hermitage, pointed out Rama and Sita, the daughter of Janaka, 
to him, and the disciple humbly communicated Rishi Agastya's 
message, conducting Rama into the hermitage. 
Rama, accompanied by Sita and Lakshmana, entering the 
enclosure, which was filled with tame deer, observed the altars 
set up to Brahma and Agni and also the sacred places dedicated 
to Vishnu, Mahendra, Vivaswat, Soma, Bhaga, Kuvera, 
Dhatar and Vidhatar, Vayu, the God who holds the Thread in 
his hand,1 the magnanimous Varuna, Gayatri, the Vasus, the 
Nagas, Garuda, Karttikeya and Dharma. 
Escorted by the disciple, he saw all these and suddenly 
beheld the great sage himself. Seeing him at the head of the 
ascetics, blazing with the lustre acquired by the practice of 
i Yama— The God of Death. 
28 
ARANYA KANDA 
austerities, the valiant Rama said to Lakshmana, the increaser 
of his delight : — 
" O Lakshmana, behold that blessed ascetic, Agastya, leaving 
the place of sacrifice ; it is with pride that I bow before that 
treasury of renunciation." 
Speaking thus of Agastya, who shone like the sun, whilst 
he advanced towards him, the joy of the House of Raghu 
took hold of his feet and paid obeisance to him. Having 
saluted him, the virtuous Raina stood before him with joined 
palms, in company with Videha's daughter and Saumitri. 
Thereafter, embracing Kakutstha and honouring him with 
water and a seat, questioning him as to his welfare, the saint 
bade him welcome according to the tradition of the forest. 
Offering oblations into the fire, and presenting his guests with 
the arghya, that ascetic entertained them with food and placing 
himself at the side of Rama, who, conversant with his duty, 
sat with joined palms, said to him : — 
" O Prince, an ascetic who fails to offer proper hospitality 
will feed on his own flesh in the other world, as does one who 
bears false witness. O Lord of the Universe, Observer of Thy 
Duty, Warrior of the Great Car, who art worthy of all honour 
and respect, thou art come at last and art my beloved guest." 
With these words, the Sage Agastya, as a symbol of homage, 
offered Rama fruits, roots, flowers, water and other things in 
great profusion, and said to him : — 
" Here is a celestial and powerful bow, encrusted with gold 
and diamonds, that belonged to Vishnu. O Tiger among Men, 
it is the creation of Vishwakarma. 
" Here also is the Brahmadatta dart, which is infallible and 
resembles the sun ; it is pre-eminent and was given to me by 
Mahendra ; here also are these two inexhaustible quivers, 
filled with sharp arrows that blaze like torches and here a 
mighty silver scabbard and a sword decorated with gold. 
" With this bow, O Rama, Vishnu slew the great asura in 
battle and formerly acquired inexpressible glory amongst the 
dwellers in the celestial regions. 
" This bow, these two quivers, the dart and the sword, 
pledges of victory, do thou accept, O Proud Warrior, and bear 
them as Vajradhara the thunderbolt.*' 
29 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Thus speaking, the illustrious and fortunate Agastya gave to 
Rama the whole panoply of weapons belonging to the mighty 
Vishnu, and once more addressed him : — 
chapter 13 
Rama goes to Panchavati on the advice of Agastya 
" O Rama, may happiness attend thee ! O Lakshmana, I am 
pleased with thee that with Sita thou hast come hither to 
pay me homage. Undoubtedly the long journey will have 
wearied you both, as also Maithili, whose sighs betray it. 
" That youthful lady, who is unaccustomed to exertion, has 
come to the forest out of love for her lord, though the way is 
beset with difficulties ; therefore, O Rama, do that which will 
give her pleasure. 
" Since the beginning of time, O Joy of the House of Raghu, 
it has been woman's nature to cling to a man in prosperity 
and abandon him in adversity. Swift as lightning in thought, 
sharp as a sword in speech, her moods comparable to an eagle's 
flight, such is woman ! But thy consort is wholly free from 
these defects, she is worthy of praise and is the foremost of 
those devoted to their lord ; amongst the Gods she is known 
as a second Arundhati. That region will be renowned where 
thou, Saumitri and this princess have sojourned, O Conqueror 
of Thy Foes." 
Thus did the sage address Raghava, who, with joined palms, 
in humble accents, answered that ascetic who shone like a 
flame, saying: — 
"I am overwhelmed with favour, since the foremost among 
ascetics is gratified with me, as also with my brother and my 
consort who accompany me. 
" Do thou direct me to a place abounding in trees, and with 
abundant water, where we can dwell in peace and happiness." 
Hearing Rama's words, that excellent and magnanimous 
sage, reflecting an instant, made this judicious reply : — 
" My Dear Son, at eight miles distance from here, is a spot 
30 
ARANYA KANDA 
known by the name of Panchavati, where roots, fruit and 
water abound and where there are many deer. Go thither and 
with Saumitri establish a hermitage, living there happily and 
carrying out the behests of thy sire. 
" By the power of my penance and by virtue of the affection 
I bore for King Dasaratha, I am acquainted with thy history, 
O Irreproachable Prince. Though thou hast promised to 
remain with me in these solitudes, yet mine austerities have 
revealed to me the true desires of thine heart. Therefore I 
say to thee again : ' Seek out Panchavati ! ' It is an enchanting 
woodland, that will delight Maithili. That place, worthy of 
all praise, is not far from here, O Raghava, and is close to the 
Godaveri river; Sita will be happy there. Abounding in 
roots, fruit and every kind of bird, it is set apart, O Long armed Hero, and is lovely, delightful and sacred. Thou of 
righteous ways, who art ever active and able to defend all 
beings, wilt dwell there, O Rama, in order to protect the ascetics. 
To the north of the Madhuka woods, which thou art able 
to see from here, O Hero, thou wilt find a grove of fig trees. 
Scale the mountain ridges, not far distant, and thou shalt come 
upon the renowned Panchavati, lying there with its flowering 
woods." 
Hearing the words of the Sage Agastya, Rama, accompanied 
by Saumitri, took leave of that illustrious ascetic, and having 
circumambulated him, paid homage to his feet and with his 
permission departed towards the solitudes of Panchavati, 
accompanied by Sita. 
The two princes, invincible in combat, taking up their 
bows and strapping on their quivers, resolutely followed the 
path to Panchavati, pointed out by the great sage. 
chapter 14 
Jatayu reveals Ms Lineage to Rama 
As he was proceeding to Panchavati, that descendant of Raghu 
observed a large and powerful vulture. Seeing that bird in 
the woods, the two illustrious princes, Rama and Lakshmana, 
3i 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
thinking him to be a demon in another form, said to him: 
" Who art thou ? " 
Then, in gentle caressing tones, the bird, as though 
addressing one dear to him, answered, saying : " Dear Child, 
know me to be the friend of thy sire ! " 
In deference to this relationship, Raghava paid obeisance to 
him, and enquired of him concerning his name and lineage, 
and he, hearing Rama's words, said : — 
" In a former age there existed the Prajapatis, whom I will 
enumerate — the first of them was Kardama and immediately 
succeeding him was Vikrita, then came Shesha and Samshraya, 
the father of many powerful sons, thereafter came Sthanu, 
Marichi, Atri, Kratu who was full of energy, Poulastya, Angira, 
Pracheta, Pulaha and Daksha followed by Vivaswat and 
Arishtanemi; O Raghava, the renowned Kashyapa was the 
last of these. O Hero of Infinite Renown, we have heard 
that Prajapati Daksha had sixty lovely and illustrious daughters. 
Kashyapa wedded eight of these damsels of elegant waist, 
Aditi, Diti, Kalika, Tamra, Krodhavasa, Manu and Anila and 
well pleased, said to them : ' Do ye all beget sons, like unto 
myself, who shall be Lords of the Three Worlds.' 
" Thereupon Aditi consented, O Rama, as did Diti, Danu 
and Kalika, but the others refused. 
" Aditi became the mother of the Thirty-three Immortals. 
O My Son, Diti gave birth to the illustrious Daityas ; it was 
to them that the earth with its seas and forests belonged. 
" Danu gave birth to a son named Ashagriva, O Subduer of 
thy Foes, and Kalika gave birth to Naraka and Kalaka ; 
and the five famous daughters, Kraunchi, Bhasi, Shyeni, 
Dhritarashtri and Shuki were produced by Tamra. 
" Kraunchi begot the owls and Bhasi the vultures ; Shyeni 
was the mother of the hawks and eagles possessed of great 
energy ; Dhritarashtri, of swans, flamingoes and water fowl. 
" The beautiful Shuki begot Nata whose daughter was 
Vinata. O Rama, Krodhavasa brought forth ten daughters : 
Mrigi, Mrigimanda, Hari, Bhadramada, Matangi, Sharduli, 
Sheveta, Surabhi and Surasa, who were all endowed with 
beauty; finally Kadruka was born. 
3* 
ARANYA KANDA 
" O First of Men, Mrigi became the mother of all the deer ; 
Mrigamanda begot bears, buffaloes and yaks. 
" Bhadramada had a daughter named Iravati who was the 
mother of Airavata, who is the guardian of the world. 
" Hari gave birth to powerful lions and monkeys, lovers of 
the forest ; Sharduli begot chimpanzees and tigers. Of 
Matangi were born elephants, O Kakutstha, O Best of Men 1 
Shiveta gave birth to the elephants who support the earth. 
" Two daughters were born of the Goddess Surabhi : Rohini, 
and the auspicious Gandharvi. 
" Rohini produced cows, and Gandharvi brought forth 
horses. Sarasa was the mother of the hooded serpents, O 
Rama, and Kadru gave birth to all other snakes. 
" Manu, wife of the magnanimous Kashyapa, gave birth to 
men, Brahmins Kshattriyas, Vaisyas and Shudras, O Lion 
amongst Men. 
"According to tradition, from her mouth were born the 
Brahmins, from her breasts the Kshattriyas, from her thighs 
the Vaishyas and from her feet the Shudras. 
" AH the trees with succulent fruits were bora of Anala. 
" Vinata, whose grandmother was Shuki, herself begot Kadru 
and her sister, Surasa. 
" Of Kadru were born thousands of serpents, the supporters 
of the earth, and Vinata had two sons, Garuda and Aruna. 
*' Know that I was born of Aruna, as also was Sampati, my 
elder brother. My name is Jatayu, the descendant of Shyeni, 
O Subduer of Thine Enemies. 
" O My dear Child, I will take up my abode in thy vicinity, 
if thou so desire it, and keep watch over Sita, whilst thou art 
away with Lakshmana." 
Raghava, having often heard of his father's friendship with 
the vulture, was filled with delight, and embraced him with 
affection, paying obeisance to him. 
Having requested that powerful bird to keep watch over 
Sita, he went on towards Panchavati with him, accompanied 
by Lakshmana, firmly resolving to destroy his enemies and 
duly observing his daily devotions. 
33 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER I 5 
Rama takes up his Abode in Panchavati 
When he had reached Panchavati, frequented by wild beasts 
and deer, Rama said to his brother Lakshmana, who was 
burning with energy : — 
" O Dear One, we have reached the place described by the 
sage, this woodland of flowering trees, the much-loved 
Panchavati. O Thou who art full of resource, look about on 
every side and ascertain in which spot it is fitting for us to 
construct our hermitage. Let it be in the vicinity of a pool 
where the charm of the forest and the water adds to its beauty, 
where thou, Sita and I, may dwell in peace, where flowers, 
fuel and kusha grass abound." 
Hearing the words of Rama, the offspring of Kakutstha, 
Lakshmana, with joined palms, in the presence of Sita, answered 
him: — 
" Wert thou to live a hundred years, I should still be thy 
servant, O Kakutstha ! Do thou select some place favoured by 
thee and command me to build a retreat." 
Well pleased with Lakshmana's compliance, that illustrious 
hero, looking here and there, chose a site which combined 
every advantage, and on that spot, taking the hand of Saumitri 
in his, said : — 
" Here is a level place that is pleasant and surrounded by 
trees; it is here that I desire thee to construct a retreat. 
Nearby is an enchanting river, rendered beautiful by lotuses, 
bright as the sun, exhaling a delicious fragrance, as described 
to me by that Rishi of pure soul, Agastya. This is the delightful 
river Godaveri, bordered with flowering trees, teeming with 
swans and waterfowl, geese enhancing its beauty and thronged 
with herds of deer, neither too near nor too far away, that 
come here to drink. 
" And re-echoing to the cry of peacocks, lovely hills covered 
with blossoming trees containing many a cave, resembled great 
34 
ARANYA KANDA 
elephants with huge howdahs embroidered in gold, silver and 
copper, that are studded here and there with tiny mirrors. 
" Sala, Tala, Tamala, Kharjura, Panasa, Nivara, Tinisha 
and Punnaga trees are their decoration, while Cuta, Ashoka, 
Tilaka, Ketaka and Champaka entwined with flowering creepers 
and plants, abound as also Syandana, Chandana, Nipa, Panasa, 
Lakuka, Dhara, Ashwakarna, Khadira, Shami, Tinduka and 
Patala trees. In this sacred place, this enchanting spot filled 
with deer and birds, let us dwell with Jatayu, O Saumitri." 
Thus addressed by his brother Rama, Lakshmana, Slayer 
of Hostile Warriors, endowed with great energy, built him a 
retreat there without delay and constructed a spacious hut 
with walls of mud, supported by strong stakes made of long 
graceful bamboos, thatched with boughs of the Shami tree. 
Creepers, kusha and sarpat grass strengthened it, while reeds 
and leaves were also used for the roof, its floor being well 
levelled. 
Then the fortunate Lakshmana, having constructed that 
excellent hut, lovely to behold, went to the river Godaveri, 
and after bathing, gathered lotuses and fruit, returning to the 
hermitage to offer the flowers there and perform those traditional 
rites proper to the peace of that dwelling, thereafter leading 
Rama to the hut he had set up. 
Seeing that charming retreat and the thatched hut, Raghava, 
who was accompanied by Sita, experienced intense delight. 
Highly gratified, he pressed Lakshmana to his heart and in 
a voice full of tenderness and feeling, said to him : — 
" I am pleased with thee ; thou hast accomplished a great 
feat, O My Brother, for which as a token of satisfaction I now 
embrace thee. Whilst thou dost still live, with thy zeal, thy 
devotion and thy virtue, O Lakshmana, our illustrious sire is 
not dead." 
Having spoken thus to Lakshmana, Raghava, the source of 
others prosperity, began to dwell happily in that region 
abounding in fruit. And ministered to by Sita and Lakshmana, 
that illustrious One lived there with them for some time, like the 
Gods in heaven. 
35 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER I 6 
Description of Winter by Lakshmana 
Whilst the magnanimous Rama was sojourning there, autumn 
passed away and the winter season set in. 
One day at dawn, the issue of the House of Raghu went to 
the enchanting river Godaveri to perform his ablutions and 
the valiant Saumitri, pitcher in hand, following humbly with 
Sita, addressed him, saying : — 
" Now that season dear to thee has come, O Amiable Prince, 
during which the whole year seems to clothe itself in splendour ! 
The ground is covered with frost and water is no longer pleasant 
to drink. 
" Having offered ripened grain to the Pitris and the Gods, 
men are purified of their sins, their sacrifices having been 
made at the proper season. Desirous of the necessities of life, 
all are now abundantly supplied with milk and butter. 
" Kings, dreaming of conquest, set out on their campaigns. 
The sun veering towards the southern region, beloved of 
Antaka, causes the north to resemble a woman, whose tilak 
mark is effaced. The Himavat Mountain, covered with snow, 
justly bears its name. Those clear days, when one seeks the 
sun and Sees from shade and damp, are exceedingly pleasant, 
but now there is only faint sunshine, constant frost, piercing 
cold and deep snow. The long cold nights are with us, when 
it is no longer possible to lie in the open, and the Pushya star 
which served as a beacon is now obscured in the snow-laden air. 
The moon, that draws its brilliance from the sun, no longer 
shines, and its frozen disc is dim, like a mirror tarnished by 
the breath ; wrinkled by the cold, that orb's surface, though 
at the full, no longer sends forth its rays, like Sita, when her 
complexion, tanned by the sun, loses its radiance. 
"Now that the snow is blended with its breath the west 
wind is icy, and the mornings are bitingly cold. The woods 
36 
ARANYA KANDA 
are shrouded in mist and the fields of barley and wheat, 
covered in rime, sparkle in the rising sun, while herons and 
cranes call in chorus. Fields of rice with ears resembling 
Kharjura flowers bend gracefully under the weight of the gram. 
*' With its rays scarcely penetrating the snow-laden clouds, 
the sun, long after it has risen, resembles the moon, but 
gradually gaining strength during the morning hours, rejoices 
the heart at noon, its rays shedding a pale beauty on the earth 
causing the woodland rides, covered with grass and drenched 
with dew, to sparkle. 
" The wild elephant, suffering from extreme thirst, with draws its trunk suddenly on coming in contact with the frozen 
water, and the waterfowl, standing on the banks, dare not 
enter the stream, like unto cowardly warriors, fearful of setting 
foot on the battlefield. 
" Enveloped in dew at evening and wreathed in cold grey 
mist at dawn, the trees, bereft of flowers, seem to sleep. 
Streams are shrouded in fog and the cranes, their plumage 
hidden under the snow, can only be distinguished by their 
cries ; the sands on the banks too are wet with snow. 
" On account of the weakness of the sun's rays, the water 
remains in the hollows of hard rocks after the fall of snow 
and tastes sweet. The lotuses are nipped by frost, their 
stamens dried up, their petals fallen, only the stalks remaining, 
and in the grip of the bitter cold have lost all their beauty. 
" O Lion among Men, at this season, in devotion to thee, 
the unfortunate and faithful Bharata is undergoing penance 
in the city. Renouncing kingdom, pomp and every pleasure, 
practising austerity, he gives himself up to fasting and restraint, 
and at this very hour is certainly making bis way to the river 
Sarayu surrounded by his ministers in order to perform his 
ablutions. 
" Brought up in luxury, exceedingly frail, tormented by the 
cold, how, in the last hour of the night, is he able to endure 
tie icy water ? 
" With his large eyes resembling lotus petals, his dark skin 
and depressed navel, that great and virtuous Bharata, who is 
dutiful, truthful, restrained, his senses fully controlled, of 
sweet speech and gentle, that long-armed hero, the subduer 
37 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
of his foes, renouncing every pleasure, is wholly devoted to 
thee, O Rama. 
" My Brother, the magnanimous Bharata, by living as if 
banished to the forest, in imitation of thee resident there, has 
conquered heaven, O Rama. 
" It is said that a man resembles his mother and not bis 
father. If it be so, how can a woman as cruel as Kaikeyi 
be his mother ? " 
Thus spoke the virtuous Lakshmana in brotherly affection, 
but Rama, unable to brook their mother being blamed, answered 
him, saying : — 
" She who occupies the second place among the queens, 
O My Friend, should not be disparaged in any way whatsoever. 
Do thou continue to speak of Bharata, the protector of the 
House of Ikshwaku. 
" Though I have determined to dwell in the forest, yet my 
love for Bharata shakes my resolve and causes me to waver 
anew. I recollect his gentle and affectionate words well, 
sweet as amrita, delighting the soul. O when shall I be re united with the magnanimous Bharata and the valiant 
Shatrughna, together with thee, O Joy of the House of Raghu? " 
Lamenting thus, Kakutstha came to the Godaveri river, 
where he, bis younger brother and Sita performed their ablu tions ; then having offered water to the Gods and the Fitris, 
those sinless ones worshipped the rising sun and the Lord 
Narayana, thus purifying themselves. 
Thereafter, Rama, accompanied by Sita and Lakshmana, 
appeared beautiful, resembling the Lord Shiva accompanied 
by Nandi and the Daughter of the Mountains.1 
CHAPTER i 7 
The arrived of Shurpanakha at the Hermitage 
Having bathed in the Godaveri river, Rama, Sita and Lakshmana 
left its banks and returned to the hermitage. On reaching 
their retreat, Raghava with Lakshmana performed their morn ing devotions and entered the leaf-thatched hut. In the hut, 
1 Girija, a name of ParvatL 
38 
ARANYA KANDA 
that long-armed hero with Sita at his side dwelt happily, 
honoured by the great Rishis, and shone hke the moon accom panied by the Chitra star. 
One day, while Rama was reciting the traditional texts, a 
female demon chanced to pass that way, by name Shurpanakha 
who was the sister of Ravana. 
Approaching Rama, she observed that he resembled a God, 
with his radiant countenance, his long arms, his large eyes 
like unto lotus petals, his majestic gait resembling an elephant's, 
matted locks crowning his head ; youthful, full of valour, 
bearing the marks of royalty, bis colour that of the blue lotus 
and alluring as the God of Love himself. 
Beholding that hero, the equal of Indra, the Rakshasi was 
overwhelmed with desire. Rama was handsome, she hideous ; 
his waist was slender, hers thick and heavy ; he had large eyes, 
hers squinted; his locks were beautiful, hers were red; his 
whole appearance was pleasing, hers repellent. Rama's voice 
was sonorous, hers strident ; he was fair and youthful, she old 
and haggard ; he was amiable, she sullen ; he was self controlled, she unruly ; he was captivating, she odious. 
Consumed with passion, the Rakshasi said to Rama : — 
" With thy matted locks and ascetic guise, bearing bow and 
arrows, why hast thou, accompanied by thy consort, come to 
these woods, which are frequented by demons ? What is the 
purpose of thy journey ? " 
Hearing the words of the Rakshasi, Shurpanakha, that hero, 
the Scourge of his Foes, with perfect candour began to relate all. 
He said : — " There was a king named Dasaratha, who was 
as powerful as a God. I am his eldest son, known among men 
as Rama ; this is my younger brother, Lakshmana, my faithful 
companion, and this, my consort, the illustrious Sita, daughter 
of the King of Videha. 
" Bound by the will of my sire and in order to carry out 
my duty, I have come to dwell in the forest. 
" But now I wish to know who thy father is, who thou art, 
and what thy race ? To judge by thy charms, thou art a 
Rakshasi ! Tell me truly, what has brought thee hither ? " 
Hearing the words of Rama, the Rakshasi, tormented by 
tiie pangs of love, answered : — 
39 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
" Hear O Rama and I will tell thee the truth ! I am 
Shurpanakha, a Rakshasi, who can change her form at will. 
I wander about in the forest, striking terror in the hearts of 
all beings. My brothers are Ravana, of whom thou hast 
doubtless heard, and the powerful and somnolent Kumbha karna, the virtuous Bibishana a stranger to our practices, and 
two others famed for their martial qualities, Khara and Dushana. 
" I, who am more powerful than they, having seen thee, 
O Rama, wish to unite myself with thee, O Lord, O First 
of Men 1 
" I am endowed with power and able to range at will by 
thought alone ; therefore do thou become my master. What 
is Sita to thee ? 
" Deformed, without beauty, she is not worthy of thee, 
whereas I should prove a well-matched partner, my beauty 
equal to thine own ; do thou look on me as thy consort. This 
unsightly, grim-visaged human female, of lean abdomen, will 
be devoured by me this day in thy presence, together with that 
brother of thine. 
" Thou and I shall wander on the summit of the mountains 
and through the forests together, exploring the whole region 
of Dandaka, according to thy whim." 
Speaking thus, the Rakshasi threw impassioned glances at 
Rama, who, smiling, made the following astute reply. 
CHAPTER i S 
The Mutilation of Shurpanakha 
Smiling a little, Rama, in gently mocking tones, answered 
Shurpanakha, who had been caught in the noose of love, 
saying:— 
" I am already wedded and this is my beloved consort ; the 
rivalry between co-wives would prove unbearable ! My 
younger brother however who is of a happy disposition, of 
agreeable appearance, virtuous and chaste, is called Lakshmana 
and is full of vigour. He has not yet experienced the joys of 
40 
ARANYA KANDA 
a wife's company and desires a consort. He is youthful and 
attractive and would therefore be a fitting husband for thee. 
Take my brother as thy lord, O Lady of large eyes and lovely 
hips, and enjoy him without a rival, as Mount Mem, the 
sunlight." 
Hearing these words, the Rakshasi, blinded by passion, 
leaving Rama, at once addressed Lakshmana, saying : — 
" My beauty renders me a worthy wife for thee ; therefore 
come and we will range the Dandaka Forest and mountains 
happily together." 
Thus accosted by the Rakshasi Shurpanakha, Lakshmana, 
the son of Sumitra, skilled in discourse, smiling, gave this 
ingenious reply : — 
" How canst thou wish to become the wife of a slave, such 
as I ? I am wholly dependent on my noble brother, O Thou 
whose complexion resembles the lotus, who art pleasing to 
look upon and chaste ? O Lady of large eyes, thou art a paragon, 
do thou become the consort of that matchless hero. Re nouncing that ugly, evil and peevish old woman, whose limbs 
are deformed, he will certainly devote himself to thee ! O 
Lady of ravishing complexion and lovely limbs, what sensible 
man would sacrifice that unrivalled beauty of thine for an 
ordinary woman ? " 
Thinking Lakshmana's words to be sincere and not under standing his jest, that cruel and misshapen Rakshasi, in the 
blindness of her passion once more addressed Rama, the 
Scourge of His Foes, who was seated in the leaf-thatched hut 
with Sita, and said : — 
" Is it for this hideous, evil and peevish woman, who is old 
and deformed, that thou dost slight me ? 
" I shall devour her in thy presence to-day, and shall live 
happily with thee without a rival." 
Speaking thus, the Rakshasi, whose eyes blazed like torches, 
hurled herself in fury on Sita, like a great meteor descending 
on the planet Rohini. 
Then the mighty Rama restrained her, as, like the noose of 
death, she advanced towards Sita, and in anger addressed 
Lakshmana, saying : — 
" It is unwise to taunt those beings who are vile and cruel, 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
O Saumitri. Take heed, see, Vaidehi is in danger, O Friend ! 
Do thou maim this hideous demon of protruding belly, who is 
evil and filled with fury." 
The valiant Lakshmana, highly incensed against the Rakshasi, 
thereupon drew his sword from its scabbard and, in the presence 
of Rama, cut off her ears and nose. 
Her ears and nose severed, Shurpanakha uttered a terrible 
cry and ran into the forest. Being mutilated, the Rakshasi, 
streaming with blood, created a terrible uproar, like a tempest 
in the rainy season and, dripping with blood, that hideous 
monster, lifting up her arms, plunged howling into the deep 
woods. 
Thereafter the injured Shurpanakha sought out her brother 
Khara of great might, who, surrounded by a troop of demons, 
was seated in Janastnana and threw herself on the ground 
before him, like a meteorite falling from heaven. 
Wild with terror and covered with blood, Khara's sister, 
almost deprived of her senses, related everything concerning 
Raghava's arrival in the forest with his consort and Lakshmana 
and the circumstances of her disfigurement. 
CHAPTER 19 
Shurpanaka tells her brother Khara of her disfigurement 
Seeing his sister lying on the ground, mutilated and streaming 
with blood, the demon, inflamed with anger, said to her : — 
"Rise! Tell me why thou art distraught; master thy 
terror and narrate lucidly, who has disfigured thee in this 
fashion. Who has dared to touch a black and venomous 
serpent, stretched peacefully beside him, with his foot ? That 
fool who has thus dealt with thee, is unaware that this day he 
has swallowed a virulent poison and placed the noose of death 
round his neck. 
" Who has brought thee to this state, thou who art imbued 
with energy and courage, who art able to range everywhere 
at will, the rival of Antaka himself? How is it that thou art 
ARANYA KANDA 
found in this sorry plight? Amongst Gods, Gandharvas, 
mighty Sages and other Beings, who is sufficiently powerful to 
have disfigured thee ? I know of none in all the worlds who 
would dare to provoke me, save it be Mahendra, He of the 
Thousand Eyes, who overcame the demon Paka. To-day I 
shall exact the life of thy traducer with my death-dealing 
arrows, as swans suck out the milky substance that floats on 
the water. 
" Struck down in the fight, mortally wounded by my shafts, 
whose foaming blood will the earth drink to-day? Whose 
limbs will the vultures, drawn by my summons, tear apart and 
devour with delight when they fall under my blows in combat ? 
" Neither the Gods nor the Gandharvas nor the Pisachas nor 
the Rakshasas shall be able to save that wretch from my grasp, 
in that fierce encounter. 
" Compose thyself and in tranquillity, tell me who that 
miscreant is and who, abusing his power, has ill-treated thee 
thus ? " 
Having listened to her brother's words, Shurpanakha, beside 
herself with rage, answered weeping : — 
" They are two most handsome and powerful youths, with 
large eyes resembling lotuses, clad in bark and black antelope 
skins, living on fruit and roots, their senses under control, 
practising penance and the brahmacharya vow, the sons of 
King Dasaratha, two brothers, Rama and Lakshmana, who bear 
the marks of royalty and resemble the King of the Gandharvas. 
I am unable to say if they be human beings or Gods. Between 
them, I saw a young and beautiful damsel of slender waist, 
adorned with many kinds of jewels, and it is on account of this 
youthful woman that I am reduced to this plight, like one 
uncared for and set at naught on account of her infidelity. I 
wish to drink the blood of this woman and those two youths on 
the battlefield." 
Hearing his sister utter these words, Khara, mad with anger, 
called on fourteen demons of great strength, equal to Antaka 
himself, and said to them : — 
" Two men furnished with weapons, clad in bark and black 
antelope skins, have ventured into the inaccessible Dandaka 
Forest in company with a youthful woman ; do ye slay them 
43 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
and also that wretch herself. My sister desires to drink their 
blood ! O Ye Rakshasas, this is my sister's dearest wish, 
go therefore with all speed and in your great might destroy 
them. On seeing the two brothers struck down by your blows, 
my sister will drink their blood on the field, with joy." 
Receiving this command, the fourteen demons swiftly 
departed, accompanied by Shurpanakha, like clouds driven 
before the wind. 
chapter 20 
Rama slays the Demons sent by Kkara 
The cruel Shurpanakha, having reached Raghava's hermitage, 
pointed out the two brothers and Sita to the demons, and 
they beheld Rama, full of valour, seated in his hut of leaves, 
in company with Sita, attended on by Lakshmana. 
Seeing Shurpanakha and the demons who accompanied her, 
the illustrious descendant of the House of Raghu, Rama, said 
to Lakshmana who was burning with courage : — 
" Stay a moment with Sita, O Saumitri, so that I may slay 
these demons who have followed the Rakshasi." 
Hearing the words of Rama, versed in knowledge of the 
Self, that prudent offshoot of the House of Raghu answered 
with deference, saying : " Be it so." 
Then the righteous Raghava, stretching his great bow, inlaid 
with gold, addressed those demons, saying : — 
" We are the sons of Dasaratha, two brothers, Rama and 
Lakshmana, who have come with Sita to the inaccessible 
Dandaka Forest. Living on roots and fruit, with our. senses 
under control, we practice penance and the brahmacharya vow 
and pass our days in the woods. Why do you seek to do us 
injury, wretches that you are ? It is at the request of the Sages, 
that I have come hither to castigate you for your evil deeds 
on the field of battle. Halt where you stand and advance no 
further ! If you desire to live, turn back, O Prowlers of the 
Night." 
44 
ARANYA KANDA 
At these words, those slayers of brahmins, the fourteen 
demons, bearing spears in their hands, inflamed with anger, 
their eyes red, terrible to behold, filled with a fierce exultation, 
answered Rama, whose fiery glances and sweet speech mani fested a courage they had not seen till that hour, and said : — 
" For having incurred the displeasure of our master, the 
most magnanimous Khara, thou art about to fall under our 
blows in battle. What power hast thou single-handed to 
slay so many in the field ; it is thou who shalt lose thy life to-day 
in this conflict. Our arms bearing maces, spears and darts 
will rob thee of thy strength, and thy bow shall fall from 
thy hand." 
Thus speaking, the fourteen demons, brandishing their 
formidable weapons, hurled themselves on Rama, letting fly 
their spears at the invincible Raghava, but Kakutstha with as 
many arrows tipped with gold cut off those fourteen spears. 
And that illustrious warrior, full of wrath, taking out more 
arrows, which had been sharpened on stone, seized his bow 
and placing them on the string, made the titans his target. 
Then Raghava, loosing those shafts, as Indra his thunderbolt, 
speedily pierced the breasts of those demons, and the arrows, 
all bloody, penetrated the earth like serpents disappearing into 
an ant heap. 
With their breasts pierced by those arrows, the demons fell 
to the ground, like trees, whose trunks have been severed. 
Bathed in blood, mutilated, bereft of life, they lay stretched 
on the earth, and Shurpanakha, seeing them thus, blind with 
rage, sped away, to seek out her brother Khara. 
Wounded afresh, the blood coagulating like a tree exuding 
resin, Shurpanakha fell down before her brother and in his 
presence set up a mighty uproar, wailing and shrieking, raining 
tears, her features distorted. 
Having seen the demons fall on the field of battle, Shur panakha, returning in all haste to her brother Khara, described 
their deaths to him in every detail. 
45 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 21 
Shurpanakha urges Khar a to fight Rama 
Seeing Shurpanakha beside herself, lying on the ground, 
having returned without accomplishing her design, Khara 
addressed her in harsh tones, saying : — 
" Have I not placed those valiant demons, living on flesh 
at thy disposal, for thy pleasure ? Why dost thou still com plain ? They are zealous, loyal and have ever been my trusted 
servants. Though invincible, even had they to die, they 
would not disobey me. What is this ? I wish to know the 
reason why thou art rolling on the earth like a serpent, crying 
* O, my Lord '. Why, since I am thy protector, dost thou 
lament like one abandoned ? Rise, rise ! Let us nave no more 
of these tears and swoonings." 
Thus did Khara, her brother, speak to that terrible Rakshasi 
to comfort her, and she, wiping away her tears, said : — 
" When I came hither with my nose and ears severed, drenched 
in blood, which flowed forth like a river, thou didst console me. 
To please me, thou didst command fourteen valiant demons 
to sky the ruthless Rama and Lakshmana. These demons, 
incensed against Rama, armed with spears and pikes, have 
fallen victims to his murderous arrows, in combat. Witnessing 
those skilled warriors, felled to the ground in an instant and 
Rama's great exploit, I am filled with extreme fear. 
" Trembling in every limb, terrified and beside myself, I 
take refuge in thee once more, O Prowler of the Night, seeing 
cause for apprehension on every side. Submerged as I am in 
the infinite ocean of distress, haunted by the crocodiles of 
affliction and the billows of fear, wilt thou not rescue me ? 
Under Rama's fiery arrows, the demons, eaters of flesh, who 
followed me, are lying on the ground. 
" If thou hast any pity for me and for these demons, if thou 
art possessed of the courage and strength to meet Rama in 
46 
ARANYA KANDA 
battle, then, O Prowler of the Night, slay this thorn in the side 
of the demons, who has set up his hermitage in the Dandaka 
Forest. 
" If thou dost not bring about the death of Rama, the 
Slayer of his Foes, this very day, I shall yield up my life in 
thy presence, dishonoured. I see clearly, that even supported 
by thy forces, thou art not able to meet Rama in pitched battle. 
" Thou deemest thyself to be a great hero, but thou art 
not really so, thy prowess exists only in thine own conceited 
imaginings; therefore do thou leave Janasthana, in all haste, 
with thy companions, O Stigma of Thy Race ! Do thou return 
victor in the struggle, for, if thou hast neither the strength, 
nor the valour to slay these two men, how canst thou remain 
here? 
" Defeated by Rama's prowess, thou wilt surely die, for he 
is truly brave, that son of Dasaratha, Rama, and his brother 
also, who disfigured me is supremely valiant ! " 
Thus, in the presence of her brother, did that Rakshasi 
lament again and again, beating her breast and, overcome with 
mortification, lost consciousness. Then, after a space coming 
to her senses, exercised with grief, she continued to cry out 
and strike her breast with her hands. 
CHAPTER 22 
Khara and his fourteen thousand Demons march against Rama 
Listening to Shurpanakha's reproaches, Khara, burning with 
anger, seated amidst his warriors, answered fiercely : — 
" Thy contempt incites me to ungovernable fury, I am 
beside myself and can no more endure this than it is possible 
to support salt poured into a wound. I hold Rama to be of 
no account and regard him as already dead. His offence will 
bring about his end this day ; therefore restrain thy tears, 
do not distress thyself further. I shall despatch Rama and 
his brother to the region of death, and thou, O Rakshasi, 
47 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
shalt to-day drink the warm blood of that one of evil deeds 
struck down by mine axe." 
Overjoyed on hearing these words, falling from her brother's 
lips, Shurpanakha, in her folly, began to praise Khara, the 
Foremost of Titans. 
First condemned, then extolled by her, Khara called on 
Dushana, the commander of his army, saying : — 
" O Friend, make ready fourteen thousand trained titans 
who are obedient to my commands, full of martial ardour, 
who never retreat in battle, who resemble thunder clouds and 
who revel in cruelty and delight in slaying men. 
" Do thou, with all speed, bring my chariot also, with bows, 
arrows, glittering swords, darts and javelins, that have been 
well sharpened. I wish to place myself at the head of those 
magnanimous titans, in order to slay the haughty Rama, O 
Skilful Warrior ! " 
As he was speaking, Dushana harnessed excellent horses 
to the great car, that shone like the sun, whereupon Khara 
ascended the chariot resembling the peak of Meru, that was 
vast, inlaid with pure gold, with golden wheels and shafts set 
with emeralds. Decorated with symbols of good fortune, 
such as fish, flowers, trees, rocks, mountains, birds and stars, 
it was furnished with banners and spears, hung with delightful 
bells and yoked to excellent steeds. 
Then Khara, chafing with impatience, as also Dushana, 
seeing that great host, furnished with chariots, shields, weapons 
and banners, cried to that multitude of demons : — "Advance ! " 
Thereafter that mighty titan army, numbering fourteen 
thousand, equipped with formidable shields, weapons and 
banners, rushed out impetuously, amidst a great tumult. 
Armed with hammers, picks, spears, sharp axes, sabres, 
discus and shining javelins, as well as darts, formidable clubs, 
immense bows, goads, swords, maces and thunderbolts, terrible 
to look upon, those ferocious titans, obedient to the commands 
of Khara, left Janasthana, and he, withdrawing himself a little, 
reviewed those titans of malignant aspect, who were rushing 
forth, and thereafter followed them. 
Obedient to Khara's command, the charioteer mounted on 
the car of that Slayer of His Foes, spurring on his dappled 
48 
ARANYA KANDA 
steeds, whose harness was wrought with pure gold, advanced 
with all speed, causing the cardinal points and other regions 
to ring with the sound. 
And Khara, in harsh tones, inflamed with anger, chafing 
with the desire to destroy his adversary, endowed with great 
strength, equal to Antaka, urged on his charioteer again and 
again, roaring like a great cloud about to let loose a stream 
of hail. 
chapter 23 
The Titan Army advances amid evil Portents 
At that time terrible portents appeared and from a dark cloud 
a shower of blood fell. The swift-footed steeds yoked to 
Khara's chariot, stumbled on the level road of the royal high way, strewn with flowers ; the sun was covered with a black 
disc, edged, as it were with blood, like a circle of burning 
coals, whilst a frightful vulture settled on the standard with 
its golden support. 
Birds and beasts of prey, roaming in the vicinity of Janasthana, 
emitted deafening cries, creating an appalling clamour, and near 
that region, terrible jackals gave forth fearful and blood curdling howls, like fiends. 
Immense and formidable thunderclouds resembling elephants 
with crushed Temples, showered down a rain of blood, which hid 
the entire firmament ; a great darkness fell, causing the hair 
to stand on end, obscuring the four quarters. Dusk arrived 
before the appointed time, assuming a sanguinous hue and, as 
Khara proceeded, wild beasts and birds of terrifying aspect 
barred his path, whilst herons, hyenas and vultures raised a 
ghastly clamour. 
Hideous jackals, a sign of misfortune in war, howled at 
the approaching army, flames darting from their jaws and a 
headless trunk, resembling a club, was seen close to the sun. 
Though the time of eclipse had not come, yet that golden orb 
was seized by the planet Swarbhanu ; the winds blew violently 
49 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
and the sun was bereft of lustre ; though not yet night, stars 
thick as fireflies appeared. 
Birds and fishes dived into the depths of the lakes, on which 
the lotuses had withered, and in that hour the trees were 
bereft of flowers and fruit, and sombre dust-clouds arose 
without the stirring of the wind. Parrots called wildly 
* Chichikuchi * and comets of sinister aspect fell without a 
sound; the earth with her mountains, woods and forests, 
shook. 
As Khara, standing in his chariot, was raising his war-cry, his 
left arm twitched and his voice died away ; glancing round on 
every side, his eyes were suffused with tears, his head throbbed, 
yet in his folly he did not turn back. 
Witnessing these evil portents that caused his hair to stand 
on end, with a defiant laugh, Khara addressed that host of 
titans saying : — 
" I hold these terrible portents, dreadful to behold, as 
nought compared with my power and disregard them as do 
the strong, the weak ! I am able to shoot down the stars from 
heaven with my sharp arrows ! I can subjugate the empire of 
death itself ! Till by means of my powerful weapons, I have 
brought Rama low, who depends on his strength alone, as 
also Lakshmana, I shall not turn back. May my sister, for 
whose sake I have sworn to bring about the death of Rama 
and Lakshmana, drink the blood of these two. Till this hour, 
I have not known defeat on the field of battle ; ye are witness 
to it, I do not utter falsehood ! In my wrath X am able to slay 
the Chief of the Gods bearing the thunderbolt, mounted on the 
intoxicated Airavata, how much more am I able to slay these 
two mortals ? " 
Hearing those boastful words, the vast army of the titans, 
whom death already held in his noose, was filled with incom parable joy, and advanced full of vigour, anxious to join issue 
in battle. 
Thereupon, the high-souled Rishis, Devas, Gandharvas and 
Charanas assembled and those virtuous beings said one to 
the other : — 
" Reverence to the cows, the brahmins and all those who 
have acquired spiritual merit in the world ! 
50 
ARANYA KANDA 
" As Vishnu, bearing the discus in his hand, subdued the 
Asuras, so may Rama too triumph over the titans in this fight." 
Repeatedly expressing this wish and many others, those 
illustrious Rishis and the Gods, stationed in the sky, gazed 
down on the army of the titans, that was about to be destroyed. 
Then Khara in his swiftly-moving chariot rode out to the 
head of his army and those twelve of exceeding prowess: 
Karaviraksha, Parusha, Kalakarmukha, Hemamalin, Mahamalin, 
Sarpasya, Shyengamin, Prithugriva, Vajnashatru, Vihangama, 
Dirjaya, Krudhirashana, surrounded him, and Mahakapala, 
Sthulaksha, Pramatha and Trishiras, these four followed 
Dushana. 
As a group of planets rush towards the sun or moon, so in 
their eagerness to enter the fight did that formidable army of 
of titans hurl themselves with tremendous impetus on the 
two princes. 
CHAPTER 24 
The Combat opens between Rama and the Titans 
When Khara of great prowess advanced on Rama's hermitage, 
the two princes observed many dreadful portents, and Rama, 
deeply moved, said to Lakshmana : — " O Mighty-armed One, 
these inauspicious omens, causing terror to all beings, foretell 
the destruction of the demon hosts. 
" Yonder dun-coloured clouds, resembling asses' skin, pass 
across the sky, raining blood in dreadful convulsions. Behold, 
0 Lakshmana, smoke rising from mine arrows, as if they 
rejoiced at the coming contest, and my bow of beaten gold 
moving of itself, eager for action. Meseems the cry of wild 
birds that frequent the woods foretells danger, nay, that the 
very lives of our foes are in jeopardy. Assuredly a great battle 
will shortly take place ; the twitching of my left arm betokens it. 
O Hero, for us victory is imminent, and the defeat of the 
titans assured. Thy countenance is resplendent and exultant, 
51 E 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
O Lakshmana ! Those warriors who enter into combat with 
a rueful mien are lost. 
" I hear the roar of those titans of cruel deeds and the sound 
of their drums. If a prudent man desires success and wishes 
to escape defeat, he should be forearmed against the future. 
Therefore, bearing thy bow and arrows, taking Sita with thee, 
repair to a mountain cave, screened by trees and difficult of 
access. O Lakshmana, do not oppose my commands, but, 
swearing obedience to my feet, go thither, O Friend, without 
delay. Thou art valiant and well able to strike down the 
titans, but I desire to slay these Prowlers of the Night single handed." 
Having spoken thus, Lakshmana, taking up his bow and 
arrows, withdrew with Sita to an inaccessible cave. 
As Lakshmana entered the cavern with Sita, Rama rejoiced 
at his brother's submission and donned his coat of mail. 
Clothed in armour that shone like fire, Rama resembled a 
mighty flame illumining the darkness, and that hero, standing 
erect, took up his bow and arrows and, by the twanging of 
the cord, caused the four cardinal points to re-echo. 
Then the Gods, Gandharvas, Siddhas and Charanas gathered 
together to witness the struggle and the great-souled Rishis 
began to converse one with the other, saying : — 
" May it be well with all the cows and brahmins found on 
the earth ! May Raghava overcome the descendants of 
Foulastya in combat ! May he be as victorious as Vishnu, who 
with his discus routed the foremost of the asuras ! " 
Having spoken thus, exchanging glances, they added : — 
" But how can Rama overcome those fourteen thousand 
demons of fearful deeds single-handed ? " 
Thereafter those Rajarishis and Siddhas, stationed in their 
aerial chariots, were moved with curiosity as to the outcome 
of the conflict and seeing Rama, splendidly accoutred, standing 
alone on the field of battle, all those beings were filled with 
apprehension ; the peerless Rama, however, the doer of noble 
deeds, assumed the aspect of that high-souled and avenging 
God, Rudra ! 
Whilst the Gods, Gandharvas and Charanas were still 
conversing, the army of the titans, creating a fearful clamour, 
52 
ARANYA KANDA 
clad in mail, bearing weapons and banners, appeared on every 
side. 
Uttering loud battle cries, josding one another, twanging 
their bowstrings, opening their jaws wide, they shouted : — 
" We will destroy the enemy ! " This appalling tumult filled 
the forest and struck terror into the hearts of its denizens, 
who fled from the sound, not daring to look back. 
Then the demon army, resembling a stormy sea, brandishing 
every kind of weapon, rapidly approached Rama, but he, an 
experienced warrior, looking round on every side, saw that 
army of Khara's advancing and went out to meet it, taking 
his arrows from their quiver and stretching his dread bow, 
letting forth a piercing shout presaging the death of the titans. 
Dreadful to behold in his wrath, he resembled the lire at the 
dissolution of the world and seeing him filled with energy the 
forest deities fled away. In his anger, Rama resembled the 
Bearer of the Pinaka bow intent on destroying Daksha's 
sacrifice. 
With their bows and weapons, their cars and their armour, 
which shone like fire, the hosts of those eaters of human flesh 
resembled a mass of dark clouds at the hour of sunrise. 
chapter 25 
The Combat between Rama and the Titans continues 
Approaching the hermitage, Khara, in company with those 
who preceded him, beheld Rama, the Destroyer of his Foes, 
full of wrath, armed with his bow and seeing that mighty 
warrior, bow in hand, Khara ordered his charioteer to drive 
upon him with his car. 
Thus commanded, Suta drove his horses to where the 
illustrious Rama, wielding his bow, stood unmoved. 
Beholding Khara advancing on Rama, the titans, uttering 
loud shouts, surrounded him on all sides, and he, stationed 
53 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
in his chariot amidst those Yatudhanas, resembled the planet 
Mars encircled by stars. 
Loosing a thousand shafts, Khara emitted a tremendous war cry and all the demons in fury showered various missiles on 
that invincible archer Rama, striking him in their frenzy with 
iron clubs, swords, spears and axes. 
With their colossal stature and extraordinary power, they 
resembled mountains as they bore down on Kakutstha with 
their chariots and horses. 
In their desire to overcome Rama, those demon hordes, 
mounted on elephants as high as the peaks of mountains, 
covered him with a hail of weapons, like great clouds letting 
loose their rain on the King of Mountains, and Raghava was 
hemmed in on all sides by those ferocious looking demons. 
As at evening time Mahadeva is surrounded by his satellites, 
so was Rama beset by the lances of the titans, but that prince 
received the missiles hurled against him as the sea receives the 
rivers that empty themselves therein. As the Himalayas 
remain unmoved, when struck by lightning, so did he, when 
those dreadful weapons tore his flesh. Pierced in every limb, 
the blood gushing forth on all sides, he resembled the evening 
sun enveloped in cloud. 
Beholding Rama encircled by thousands of titans, the Gods 
and sages were profoundly moved, but he, growing enraged, 
bending his bow like a sickle, let loose hundreds and thousands 
of pointed shafts, that could not be intercepted and carried 
death to those they pierced. As if in sport, on the battlefield 
Rama let fly countless arrows furnished with herons plumes, 
tipped with gold, destroying innumerable titans like the noose 
of death itself. 
Unconcernedly loosed by Rama, those arrows passed through 
the demons' bodies and, stained with blood, flew through the 
air like blazing torches. Countless shafts drawn from Rama's 
quiver fell in hundreds and thousands, robbing the demons 
of their life's breath, their bows, their banners, their shields and 
their armour, their arms embellished with ornaments and 
their thighs resembling the trunks of elephants. 
The arrows of Rama, discharged from the bowstring, cut 
down horses yoked to the chariots with their golden trappings 
54 
ARANYA KANDA 
together with the charioteers ; elephants with their riders, 
horsemen with their steeds, were aU transfixed by his shafts 
and despatched to the region of Yama. 
Pierced by those pointed shafts, the Rangers of the Night, 
emitted terrible shrieks, and decimated by those death-dealing 
arrows, the demon host was unable to defend itself, as dried 
wood is ignited by the proximity of fire. 
Then certain demon warriors, full of energy and zeal, in a 
paroxysm of rage, let fly lances, tridents and other weapons at 
Rama, but he, intercepting them, cut off the heads of those 
demons with his shafts, thus depriving them of their lives. 
They, having had their heads, their shields and their bowstrings 
severed, fell to the earth, like trees thrown down by the blast 
of Garuda's wings. 
Then the remaining titans fled, seeking refuge from those 
death-dealing arrows with Khara, but Dushana, taking up his 
bow, rallied them and rushed on Rama as if he were Antaka 
himself; thereafter the titans, growing bolder, hurled themselves 
on Rama anew, armed with the trunks of Sala and Tala trees 
and huge rocks. 
With lances, maces and snares, bearing darts, clubs and 
nooses in their hands, those great warriors covered the whole 
field with a hail of missiles, discharging volleys of trees and 
rocks. Thereafter the combat waxed furious, causing the 
hair to stand on end, and now it seemed as if Rama were the 
victor and again the demons appeared to triumph. Then, 
seeing himself beseiged on all sides, that mighty warrior Rama, 
covered by a hail of darts, sent up a terrific shout, placing the 
mantra-propelled Gandharva weapon on his bow, whereupon 
a thousand arrows sped from his bent bow, covering the ten 
regions. 
With such skill did Rama discharge his arrows, that the 
demons were unable to distinguish when he drew them from 
their quiver and when he loosed them and his shafts caused 
darkness to spread over the sky and obscure the sun. 
Slain in their thousands, the demons fell in heaps and the 
battlefield was strewn with corpses. Struck down, dis embowelled, transfixed, torn and hacked asunder, they could 
be seen in their hundreds, and the ground was scattered with 
55 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
heads wrapped in turbans, arms encircled with bangles, thighs 
and torsos with their ornaments, horses, mighty elephants, 
shattered chariots, chowries, fans, umbrellas and standards of 
every kind, and beholding the slain, the remaining demons 
were afflicted and unable to withstand Rama, that captor of 
hostile citadels, further. 
CHAPTER 26 
Rama destroys the Titans and slays Duskana 
Seeing his forces destroyed, the mighty-armed Dushana placed 
himself at the head of five thousand intrepid and invincible 
titans, to whom retreat was unknown. 
Armed with pikes, sabres, rocks and trees, they let loose a 
hail of missiles on Rama from every side, without being able 
to wound him. Their onslaught was formidable and to all but 
Rama, deadly. The virtuous Raghava, however, met the 
attack with his arrows, his eyes closed, as unconcerned as a 
bull under heavy rain. Thereafter, growing wrath, he resolved 
to destroy the whole of Khara*s army and, burning with energy, 
covered that host and its leader, Dushana, with his shafts, 
whereupon Dushana, the Slayer of His Foes, met Raghava with 
weapons that resembled thunderbolts. Then the heroic Rama, 
enraged, severed Dushana's mighty bow, slew the four steeds 
yoked to his chariot and cut off the head of his charioteer with 
a crescent-shaped arrow, thereafter piercing Dushana's breast 
thrice with his shafts. 
Then Dushana lifted up his mace covered with gold, that 
resembled a mountain peak and was capable of destroying the 
army of the Gods. Studded with nails, smeared with the 
flesh of his foes, keen as a diamond, able to cut through the 
gates of hostile cities, that weapon, resembling a mighty snake, 
was wielded by that titan of evil deeds, who hurled himself 
on Rama. 
56 
ARANYA KANDA 
Nevertheless, as Dushana rushed upon him, Rama cut off 
both his arms with his arrows, and that mace, loosed from his 
grasp, fell forward on the field like unto the banner of Indra, 
whilst Dushana, bereft of it, his arms severed, sank to the earth 
like a mighty elephant that, stripped of its tusks, succumbs. 
Seeing Dushana lying on the battlefield, all beings, witness ing that conflict, cried out " Well done ! Well done ! " and 
paid obeisance to Rama. 
Meantime, impelled by fate, the three generals, Mahakapala, 
Sthulaksha and the mighty Titan Pramathin rushed on Rama ; 
Mahakapala brandishing a great trident, Sthulaksha bearing a 
harpoon and Pramathin, a huge axe. Seeing them advancing, 
Raghava, taking out some sharp steel-pointed arrows, went 
forward to meet them, as one receives a guest, and the Delight 
of the House of Raghu severed the head of Mahakapala with 
a single arrow and assailed Pramathin with innumerable shafts, 
whereupon he fell to the earth like an axed tree ; thereafter, 
Rama blinded Sthulaksha with his sharp arrows and, inflamed 
with wrath, with five thousand shafts slew an equal number 
of Dushana's followers, sending them to the nether regions. 
Hearing that Dushana and his warriors were lying dead, 
Khara, in great fury, addressed the leaders of the army, 
saying : — " Let all the titans attack that evil wretch, Rama, 
and strike him with weapons of every kind." 
Speaking thus, Khara, full of wrath, flung himself on Rama, 
followed by Durjaya, Karaviraksha, Parusha, Kalakarmuka, 
Hemamalin, Mahamalin, Sarpashya, Syengamin, Prithagriva, 
Vajnasatru, Vihangama and Rudhinashana, those twelve 
valiant generals with their forces, who fell upon Rama, dis charging their excellent shafts. 
And Rama, endowed with supreme energy, with his gold and 
diamond encrusted arrows, despatched the remainder of 
Khara's forces, and those shafts, bereft of feathers, like golden 
stalks, resembling flames wreathed in smoke, laid those demons 
low, as lightning fells the giant trees. With a hundred ear shaped arrows, Rama slew a hundred titans ; and a thousand 
with as many shafts. Their breastplates and ornaments 
shattered, their bows broken, thbse Rangers of the Night fell 
on the earth, bathed in blood. Their hair dishevelled, covered 
57 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
with gore, they lay on the battlefield, like kusha grass scattered 
on the altar, and that great forest, strewn with the corpses of 
demons and befouled with their flesh and blood, resembled 
the region of hell. 
Fourteen thousand demons of cruel deeds were slain by 
Rama, a mortal, single-handed and on foot ! Out of the whole 
army only Khara of the great Car and the Titan, Trishiras 
survived, all others being slain by Lakshmana's elder brother, 
the illustrious Rama. 
Thereafter, seeing that vast army destroyed in the great 
conflict, Khara, ascending his splendid chariot, advanced on 
Raghava with his mace upraised. 
CHAPTER 27 
Rama and Trishiras meet in Combat Trishiras is slain 
As Khara was advancing on Rama, the leader of the army, 
Trishiras approached him and said : — " O Lord, refrain from 
engaging Rama in combat and having recourse to me, who am 
possessed of prowess, witness his defeat. I swear to thee by 
my sword that I will slay Rama and avenge the death of the 
entire demon host. In this fight I shall be as Mrityu to him 
or he to me, but thou, O Excellent One, shouldst restrain thy 
martial ardour awhile and be a spectator only. Should Rama 
be slain, thou canst return home triumphant, but should I die, 
do thou enter the field against him." 
Yielding to the persuasions of Trishiras, Khara said to him, 
who was already doomed : — " Go, engage Rama in combat ! " 
Thereupon Trishiras, like a triple crested mountain, advanced 
on Raghava in a glittering chariot yoked to excellent steeds 
and, as a great cloud pours down rain, so he discharged a volley 
of arrows, roaring the while like a kettledrum. 
Seeing that demon drawing near, Rama loosed some pointed 
shafts and a terrible struggle ensued, so that it seemed as if 
a great lion and a mighty elephant were fighting together. 
58 
ARANYA KANDA 
Trishiras, having pierced Rama's forehead with three darts, 
that hero, enraged, addressed him in biting accents, saying: — 
" O Valiant Titan, the arrows thou hast loosed I bear on my 
brow as a wreath, do thou now receive the shafts from my bow." 
Thereupon Rama let fly fourteen serpentine arrows striking 
Trishiras on the breast and with four further shafts brought 
down his four steeds, killing his charioteer with eight other 
darts and with a single arrow severing the up-raised standard 
in the front of his car. Then, as that Ranger of the Night was 
alighting from his shattered chariot, Rama pierced his breast 
with further arrows, depriving him of his senses, and that one 
of immeasurable prowess with his swift arrows cut off the 
three heads of Trishiras, causing the blood to flow from the 
stricken trunk, and the heads of that Ranger of the Night fell 
while he yet stood upright after the destruction of his forces. 
Then the remaining titans, losing heart, sped away like deer 
stampeding on the approach of a hunter, and Khara, beholding 
them fleeing, waxing wrath, rallied them and rushed on Rama 
as Rahu on the moon. 
CHAPTER 2 8 
The Combat between Rama and Kkara 
Seeing that Dushana and Trishiras had been slain in the fight 
and witnessing Rama's prowess, Khara was rilled with appre hension and reflected : — 
" My vast army with my generals Dushana and Trishiras 
has been destroyed by Rama, single-handed." 
Whereupon that Demon Khara, was seized with despondency 
and hurled himself on Rama, as the Titan Namuchi on Indra. 
Stretching his mighty bow, Khara discharged at Rama some 
blood-sucking arrows, resembling venomous snakes, and, 
mounted on bis chariot, began to range over the battlefield, 
displaying his skill in the use of weapons, covering the four 
quarters with his shafts. 
59 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Beholding this, as Parjanya with his watery floods, Rama, 
armed with his mighty bow, filled the entire firmament with his 
irresistible shafts, which resembled tongues of fire, and all space 
was filled with arrows on every side, which had been loosed 
by Khara and Rama. 
As those two heroes struggled together, the sun was obscured 
and darkness descended ; then, like a mighty elephant struck 
with a goad, Rama assailed his opponent with Nalikas, Narachas 
and sharp-pointed Vikarnas, and that demon, standing in his 
chariot, bow in hand, resembled Death himself carrying his 
noose. At that moment Khara deemed the destroyer of his 
forces, endued with heroism, the extremely powerful Rama, 
to be overcome with fatigue, but Rama remained unmoved 
under Khara's assaults, as a mighty lion ignores the presence 
of an insignificant deer. 
Then Khara, in his chariot blazing like the sun, drew 
near to Rama, as a moth approaches a flame and, displaying 
his skill, severed Rama's bow at the point where he held it, 
thereafter loosing seven mace-like shafts resembling Indra's 
thunderbolts, which shattered the armour of his adversary 
resplendent as the sun itself, so that it fell on the earth. Roaring 
like a lion, he let loose a thousand arrows, wounding Rama of 
unparalleled might, and in that conflict Khara set up a mighty 
shout. 
Pierced by Khara's arrows, the body of Rama resembled a 
clear and smokeless flame, and that Destroyer of his Foes, in 
order to compass the titan's defeat, took up another great 
bow, stringing it with a mighty twanging. Holding aloft that 
prodigious bow, named Vaishnava, bestowed on him by the 
Rishi Agastya, Rama rushed on Khara, letting fly his arrows 
furnished with golden feathers and cut down his banner plated 
with gold, which fell from the chariot, as the sun falls on the 
earth, cursed by the Gods. 
Highly provoked, Khara aimed at the heart of Rama and 
pierced him with four arrows, so that he resembled a great 
elephant under the deluge in the rainy season, and Rama, 
sorely wounded by his shafts, covered with blood, waxed 
wrath and that foremost of bowmen, with consummate skill, 
let fly six well-directed arrows. With one, he struck the head 
60 
ARANYA KANDA 
of Khara, with two others, his arms, and with the remaining 
three crescent-shaped darts, he pierced his breast. There after that illustrious warrior, in his ire, let fly thirteen arrows 
sharpened on the whetstone, blazing like the sun ; one severed 
the shafts of his adversary's car, four more felling the steeds ; 
with a sixth he smote the head of his charioteer, and with three 
others that great and intrepid warrior, shattered the axles of 
the chariot ; with the twelfth he severed Khara's bow at the 
point where he held it, and with the thirteenth arrow, that 
shone like lightning, Raghava, who was equal to Indra, trans fixed Khara, as it were in sport. 
His bow shattered, deprived of his chariot, his horses slain, 
his charioteer fallen, Khara, mace in hand, sprang to the 
ground and stood waiting. 
Seeing Rama's feat of arms that was unsurpassed, the Gods 
and great Sages rejoiced and, assembling in the sky, with joined 
palms, extolling the wonderful exploit of that mighty warrior, 
offered obeisance to him. 
CHAPTER 29 
Rama and the Demon Khara taunt one another 
Then the illustrious Rama addressed Khara, who was standing 
mace in hand, bereft of his chariot, and in severe accents, said: — 
" O Hero, with the support of this army of elephants, horses, 
chariots and men, thou hast adopted a course of action con demned by all. He who inflicts pain on others by oppressing 
them, who is ruthless and engaged in evil deeds, will never 
know happiness, even though he be Lord of the Three Worlds. 
" O Ranger of the Night, one who, like a tyrant, works 
against the interests of others and resembles a vicious and 
marauding snake, is ultimately destroyed ! He who, overcome 
by avarice or envy, pursues an evil course, without reflecting 
on the consequences, forfeits his life and comes to a miserable 
end, like a branmany duck that feeds on hailstones. 
61 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
" O Titan, how canst thou evade the consequences of the 
murder of those ascetics dwelling in the Dandaka Forest, 
enhancing their merit by the practice of virtue ? 
" Even if they attain to sovereignty, the wicked, engaged in 
cruel deeds, condemned by all men, do not enjoy it long, but 
fall like trees whose roots have been severed. 
" O Dweller in the Darkness, as in its proper season the 
tree puts forth its flowers, so in die course of time evil actions 
produce bitter fruit. 
"As a man who swallows poison soon succumbs, so does 
the sinner swiftly reap the fruits of his evil actions. It is to 
put down the instigators of evil, the oppressors of others, that 
I, under the orders of the King, have come hither. To-day 
my shining arrows shall penetrate thy flesh, as serpents enter 
an ant-heap, and thou shalt follow in the wake of those virtuous 
ascetics inhabiting the forest, whom thou hast slain without 
provocation. Soon those excellent sages, formerly slain by 
thee, shall in their aerial chariots return to behold thee lying in 
hell laid low by mine arrows. O Worst of Men, O Thou who 
art of an odious race, defend thyself as thou wilt, I shall presently 
cut off thine head like the fruit of a palm tree." 
Hearing Rama's words, Khara, his eyes inflamed with 
anger, beside himself with rage, answered mockingly : — " O 
Son of Dasaratha, thou art but a common man ; yet, having 
slain these insignificant titans in battle, thou dost extol thyself 
without reason. Those who are brave and valiant never boast 
of their prowess ; only the scum of the warrior caste praise 
themselves as thou hast done. Where is the warrior who, 
on the battlefield, his death imminent, would hymn his own 
praise? Thou hast revealed thy worthlessness by this self glorification, as brass wearing the semblance of gold reveals 
its true value in a fire of kusha grass. 
" O Rama, armed with a mace, I stand immoveable on the 
field, like a mountain enriched by precious metals. Behold 
me with my mace, like unto Antaka himself, armed with his 
noose, about to end thy life; I shall destroy not only thee, 
but the Three Worlds ! I could utter more, but refrain, lest 
our combat be intercepted as the hour of sunset is near. 
Fourteen thousand titans have fallen under thy blows; by 
62 
ARANYA KANDA 
slaying thee to-day I shall wipe away the tears of their relatives." 
Speaking thus, Khara, filled with fury, hurled his marvellous 
gold-encircled mace at Rama. Leaving the hand of Rhara, 
that massive and effulgent mace, resembling a blazing thunder bolt, consuming the trees and bushes to ashes, drew near to 
Rama, but he, as it was about to fall like the noose of death, 
shattered it to fragments with his arrows while yet in the air. 
Crushed and broken, it fell to earth like a serpent stricken 
by the efficacy of herbs and the power of incantations. 
chapter 30 
The Death of Khara 
Having intercepted and shattered that great mace with his 
arrows, the ever virtuous Rama, though still wrath, spoke as 
if in jest : — 
" O Titan, is this the extent of thy power ? How strange 
that one so deficient in prowess should boast so loudly ! 
Severed by my shafts, behold thy mace lies in pieces on the 
earth ! Thou hast bragged to no purpose ! Didst thou not 
declare : * I will wipe away the tears shed for the death of 
the titans * ? Vain words ! As Garuda of old stole the nectar 
of immortality, I am about to deprive thee of thy life, thou 
vile and lying wretch ! The earth this day will quaff the 
foaming blood issuing from thy throat, which my shafts have 
severed. Soon shall thy body, covered with dust, the arms 
extended, embrace the earth, as a frenzied lover embraces the 
woman he has won, after long delay. 
" O Obloquy of Thy Race, on thy death the Dandaka Forest 
will become a refuge for those who are themselves a refuge ; 
my shafts will rid the forest of all titans and the ascetics will 
wander about there without fear. To-day the titan women 
in sore distress, weeping and terrified, will fly this place. They 
who inspired terror in others, having evil-doers such as thou 
as their consorts, shall to-day taste the pangs of sorrow ! O 
cruel, fallen and false-hearted Wretch, in fear of whom the 
63 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
sages, tremble as they pour forth their oblations into the 
sacred fire." 
As Raghava, swayed by anger, uttered these words, Khara, 
foaming with rage, began to hurl abuses at him, saying : — 
" Verily, despite thy boasting thou art filled with terror 
and in the face of death dost not know whether to speak or to 
be silent. Those about to die lose the power of their five 
senses and no longer know what is right and wrong." 
Having spoken thus, that Ranger of the Night, Khara, 
scowling, looked round him for a weapon and, perceiving a 
great palm tree near at hand, forcibly uprooted it and whirling 
it with terrific energy hurled it at Rama, roaring : " Now thou 
art slain ! " 
Thereupon, Raghava with his weapon cut that tree to pieces 
and in an access of rage resolved to slay Khara. His body 
covered with sweat, his eyes inflamed, he pierced Khara with 
innumerable darts, so that rivers of blood gushed from his 
wounds, as do the torrents from the mountain Prasravana. 
Stupefied by Rama's arrows and maddened by the smell of 
blood, Khara rushed at Rama, who, seeing him approach full 
of fury and covered with gore, retreated a few paces ; then, 
in order to slay him, he selected an arrow that shone like fire, 
resembling the Rod of Brahma. And that righteous One dis charged that shaft at Khara, which had been conferred on 
the Sage Agastya by Indra, and like a thunderbolt it struck 
his breast so that he, consumed by the flame issuing there from, fell to the ground. As Rudra with his third eye con sumed the demon Andhaka in the forest of Sweta, as Vritra 
was slain by the thunderbolt, as Namuchi by the foam, as 
Bal by Indra's mace, so did Khara fall. 
Then the Gods and the Charanas assembled and, amazed 
and delighted, struck their drums, showering flowers on Rama 
and saying : — " In this great conflict Raghava, by means of his 
pointed shafts, has in an instant slain fourteen thousand 
demons, able to change their shape at will, with their generals, 
Khara and Dushana. Great indeed is this exploit of Rama, 
versed in the science of the Self. What valour ! His prowess 
resembles that of Vishnu himself ! " 
Saying this, the Gods returned from whence they had come. 
64 
ARANYA KANDA 
Thereafter the Rajarishis and Paramarishis, accompanied by 
Agastya, joyfully paid homage to Rama and said : — 
" It was for this that the Slayer of Paka, the mighty Purandara, 
visited the hermitage of the Sage Sharabhanga. It was for 
this that the great Rishis brought thee to this place, O Prince, 
that thou mightest compass the destruction of the titans of 
evil deeds. Thou hast fulfilled thy mission amongst us, O 
Son of Dasaratha ; from to-day the virtuous sages may per form their devotions in the Dandaka Forest in peace." 
Then that hero, Lakshmana, accompanied by Sita, issued 
from the mountain cavern and joyfully entered the hermitage, 
and the victorious and heroic Rama, honoured by the great 
Sages, returned to the ashrama, where Lakshmana paid h'tn 
obeisance. 
Seeing her consort returning victorious, having brought 
felicity to the ascetics, the happy Vaidehi embraced him. 
Beholding those hosts of demons slain, and that Destroyer of 
Enemy Hosts worshipped by the magnanimous sages, the 
daughter of Janaka began to minister to her lord and full 
of joy, embracing him afresh in her delight, experienced supreme 
happiness. 
CHAPTER 31 
Havana hears of the Death of Khara and determines to slay Rama 
The Titan Akampana, speedily leaving Janasthana, repaired to 
Lanka in order to seek out Ravana, addressing him thus : — 
" O King, the innumerable titans dwelling in Janasthana 
have perished and Khara himself has fallen on the field of 
battle; by some chance, I have been enabled to reach this 
place alive." 
Hearing these words, Ravana, his eyes growing red with 
anger, bent his gaze on Akampana as if he would consume 
him, and said : — 
" Who, seeking his own destruction, has dared to exter minate my people ? None in the world will be able to protect 
«5 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
him, not even Indra, Kuvera, Yama or Vishnu himself. No 
man can save him who has defied me ! I am the Lord of Time, 
the Consumer of Fire, the death of Death itself ! In my wrath 
I am able to reduce Aditya and Pavaka to ashes ! Verily I can 
subdue the very wind in its course ! " 
On this, Akampana, with joined palms, in a voice strangled 
with terror, solicited the protection of that Ten-necked One, 
who was mad with anger, whereupon that Lord of the Titans 
gave him the assurance of safety, inspiring him with confidence, 
and Akampana thereafter addressed him boldly, saying : — 
" There is a son of King Dasaratha, who is youthful, re sembling a lion, broad-shouldered like unto a bull, possessing 
long arms, handsome, renowned and of immeasurable prowess ; 
his name is Rama ; it is he, who in Janasthana has slain Khara 
and Dushana." 
At these words, Ravana, King of the Titans, breathing like 
a great serpent, enquired of Akampana, saying : — " O Akampana, 
when he came to Janasthana was Rama accompanied by the 
Leader of the Gods and all the Celestials ? " 
On hearing Ravana's words, Akampana began to describe the 
great and noble exploits of Raghava, saying : — 
" O King, Rama is a mighty warrior, an invincible archer 
and the equal of Indra himself in prowess ; his eyes are slightly 
red and his voice resembles a kettledrum, his countenance is 
like unto the full moon. Followed by Lakshmana, as Anila 
follows Pavaka, this is the fortunate leader of monarchs who 
has destroyed thy colony, as fire, fanned by the wind, con sumes a forest ! Rama was in no wise assisted by the Gods — 
of this there is no doubt — but bis golden-winged arrows flying 
through the air, transforming themselves into five-headed 
snakes, destroyed the demons. O Mighty Sovereign, wherever 
they fled in their terror, they beheld Rama standing before 
them, and in this wise Janasthana was destroyed by him." 
Hearing Akampana's words, Ravana cried out : — " I shall go 
to Janasthana and slay Rama and Lakshmana ! " 
Thereupon Akampana answered him, saying : — 
" O King, hear from me the true measure of Rama's strength 
and prowess. Supremely virtuous and brave, none in the 
world is able to subdue him in his wrath. By means of his 
66 
ARANYA KANDA 
shafts, he is able to stem a river in its course and shatter the 
very firmament with its stars and planets ; nay, if the earth 
were to be submerged, he could raise it up and, should he so 
desire it, change the boundaries of the sea and flood the conti nents with its waters. He is able to subdue all creatures and 
control the course of the wind itself ; indeed that foremost of 
persons, having destroyed the worlds, can create a new universe. 
O Ten-necked One, as a sinner is not able to enter heaven, 
neither canst thou, nor thy titans, defeat Rama in combat. 
The Gods and titans together cannot overcome him; yet 
there is a way of destroying him, which I will now unfold 
to thee. 
" Rama is wedded to one more beautiful than any woman 
on earth, and that slender-waisted damsel is known by the name 
of Sita. In the full bloom of youth, and possessed of well-pro portioned limbs, she is a jewel adorned by jewels. In loveliness, 
she surpasses the celestial beings, nymphs and nagas. Having 
lured Rama into the forest, do thou carry her away ! Bereft 
of Sita, Rama will not survive ! " 
The Lord of the Rakshasas was highly gratified to hear these 
words and, after a little reflection, said to Akampana : — *' Be 
it so ! To-morrow, accompanied by my charioteer alone, I 
shall, with a glad heart, bring back the Princess of Videha to 
this spacious palace ! " 
The following day, Ravana started out in his chariot, yoked 
to mules, and it was bright as the sun, illumining the four 
quarters. Following the path of the stars in its rapid course, 
it resembled the moon itself surrounded by clouds. 
Proceeding to a great distance, he approached the hermitage 
of Taraka's son, Maricha, who entertained him with marvellous 
dishes unknown to man. Presenting him with a seat and 
water wherewith to wash his feet, that demon addressed him, 
saying : — " O Lord of the Titans, is it well with thee and thy 
people ? O Sovereign, being ignorant of thine intention, thine 
unexpected and sudden advent fills me with apprehension ! " 
Then the resplendent and eloquent Ravana answered Maricha, 
saying: — 
" O Friend ! Rama, who is able to achieve that from which 
reason recoils, has destroyed the entire colony of Janasthana, 
67 f 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
heretofore impregnable, as also my generals, Khara and 
Dushana, Do thou, therefore, aid me in bearing off bis 
consort, Sita." 
Hearing these words of the King of the Titans, Maricha 
answered : — ** O King, the man who has thus counselled thee 
concerning Sita is assuredly an enemy in the guise of a friend. 
By such advice, he has unquestionably affronted thee and is 
envious of thy great might. 
" ' Bear Sita away ! * who has uttered such words ? Who 
seeks to cut off the head of the entire titan host ? Without 
doubt the man who has thus counselled thee is thine enemy, 
since he desires thee to extract the poison fangs of a serpent 
with thy bare hands. Who is it who seeks to lead thee astray 
and strikes thine head whilst thou art sleeping happily ? 
" Raghava, that intoxicated elephant, may not be withstood 
on the field of battle. With the lineage of an illustrious House 
as his trunk, his valour the ichor, his outstretched arms the 
tusks, thou art wholly unable to pit thyself against him. Do 
not rouse that sleeping Hon who hunts the titans as deer, the 
arrows of whose quiver are his talons, his sharp sword the jaws. 
" O King of the Titans, do not hurl thyself into that dreadful 
and bottomless ocean called Rama, whose bow is the crocodile, 
the strength of whose arm is the quagmire, whose shafts are 
the rising waves, and whose battlefield is its waters. 
" O Lord of Lanka, compose thyself and return in peace to 
thy capital. O Indra of Titans, continue to enjoy the company 
of thy consorts, and let Rama delight in his own, in the forest." 
Hearing the words of Maricha, the ten-headed Ravana 
returned to the city of Lanka and re-entered his palace. 
chapter 32 
Skurpanakha upbraids Ravana and urges him to destroy Rama 
When Shurpanakha saw those fourteen thousand titans of 
dreadful deeds slain by Rama single-handed on the field of 
battle, together with Khara, Dushana and Trishiras, she once 
68 
ARANYA KAKDA 
more emitted dreadful shrieks and roared like thunder. 
Perceiving the incomparable prowess of Raghava, she became 
exceedingly agitated and proceeded to Lanka, Ravana's capital. 
There she beheld Ravana shining in glory* surrounded by 
his ministers on the terrace of his palace, like India amidst 
the Maruts. Seated on his golden throne, blazing like a 
flame, Ravana resembled a great fire kindled on an altar, kept 
alive by sacrificial offerings. Unconquered by Gods, Gan dharvas, Rishis or other creatures, that warrior, who resembled 
death itself with wide-open jaws, bore on his person the 
wounds inflicted by the thunderbolts in the war between 
Gods and titans and on his breast the marks of Airavata's tusks. 
Having twenty arms, ten heads, a broad chest, wearing 
gorgeous attire and bearing the marks of royalty, he was 
adorned with a chain of emeralds and ornaments of fine gold 
and with his great arms, white teeth and enormous mouth 
resembled a mountain. 
In the combat with the Gods, Vishnu had struck him a 
hundred times with his discus, and he bore the marks of other 
weapons from that great struggle, yet his limbs were intact 
and had not been severed. He who was able to churn up the 
seas, a feat not to be performed by any other, whose missiles 
were the mountain crests, he the scourge of the Gods, who 
transgressed every moral law, the ravisher of others' wives, 
the wielder of celestial weapons, the destroyer of sacrifices, 
who descended into the city of Bhogavati and subdued the 
serpent Vasuki, from whom, on his defeat, he stole the gentle 
consort ; he who scaled Mount Kailasha and overcame Kuvera 
depriving him of his aerial chariot Pushpaka, which trans ported him wheresoever he desired; he who in his anger 
destroyed the garden of Chaitaratha, the lotus pool and the 
Nandana Grove and all the pleasurable retreats of the Gods, 
and with his vast arms, resembling the peaks of ' mountains, 
arrested the course of the sun and moon, twin scourgcts of 
their foes, rising in splendour; practising asceticism in the 
mighty forest for a thousand years he offered his heads in 
sacrifice to Swyambhu and obtained the boon that neither 
Deva, Danava, Gandharva, Pisacha, Pataya nor Uraga should 
be able to slay him, but of man there was no mention; 
69 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
proud of his strength, he stole the Soma juice, sanctified 
by mantras, before its pressing by the Twice-born in the 
sacrifice ; this perverse wretch, Ravana of evil deeds, slayer of 
the brahmins, ruthless, pitiless, delighting in causing harm to 
others, was verily a source of terror to all beings. 
The titan woman beheld her brother full of power, resplendent 
in gorgeous attire, adorned with celestial garlands, seated on 
his throne, resembling Time at the destruction of the worlds, 
that Indra of Demons, the proud descendant of Poulastya 
and she, trembling with fear, in order to address him, drew 
near to the Slayer of his Enemies, who was seated amidst his 
counsellors. Distracted with terror and passion, Shurpanakha, 
who was wont to roam everywhere unafraid, now mutilated by 
the order of that magnanimous Ramachandra, displaying her 
ravaged features before Ravana, whose large eyes appeared to 
shoot forth flames, uttered these bitter words to him : 
CHAPTER 33 
Shurpanakha's Words to Ravana 
Filled with anger, Shurpanakha addressed Ravana, the 
Oppressor of the Worlds, in harsh accents, saying : — 
" O Ravana, wholly devoted to pleasure and indulging in 
every whim without scruple, thou art oblivious of the great 
calamity that threatens thee. That monarch who is given up 
to lust and other dissipations and who is covetous, is disregarded 
by his subjects, as is the fire in the crematorium. That king 
who does not fulfil his duties at the proper season brings ruin 
on his state. The Prince who, committing excess, is ruled by 
his consorts and readily gives credence to other's counsel, is 
shunned as the mud of a river is shunned by an elephant. 
Those rulers who are unable to protect their lands or reclaim 
the territory wrested from them, live without glory, like moun tains submerged in the ocean. 
" At enmity with the Gods, the Gandharvas and the Danavas, 
who are masters of themselves, doing what ought not to be 
done and inconstant, how art thou able to rule as king ? 
70 
ARANYA KANDA 
" O Titan, thou art childish and thoughtless and art not 
conversant with that which should be known to thee ; how 
canst thou govern ? Those monarchs who have neither 
emissaries, wealth nor policy at their disposal, resemble a 
common man, O Prince of Conquerors ! Since kings are 
informed by their spies as to what is taking place abroad, they 
are said to be far-sighted. Meseems thou dost not discharge 
thy duty and that the counsellors who surround thee are in experienced, since thou art insensible to the destruction of thy 
people and their territory. 
" Fourteen thousand titans of dreadful deeds with Khara 
and Dushana have been slain by Rama single-handed ; Rama 
of imperishable exploits has freed the ascetics of fear, estab lished peace in the Dandaka Forest and harassed Janasthana, 
but thou, who art covetous and a slave to lust, art unaware 
of the danger that threatens thy dominion. None will help 
that monarch in time of peril, who is mean, violent, dissolute, 
haughty and perfidious. 5iven his own relatives will overpower 
a king who is excessively vain, pretentious, boastful and irascible. 
That monarch who fails in his duty and, under the threat of 
danger is lulled into a false security, will in time of adversity 
be swept from his kingdom like a straw. Dry wood, turf or 
dust have some value, but a king who is degenerate is worthless 
and resembles a faded wreath or a worn-out garment. That 
monarch who is vigilant however, conversant with what is 
happening and virtuous, establishes his throne in perpetuity. 
The king who, even while sleeping, is yet awake to the ordering 
of his kingdom, who manifests his anger or approval at a fitting 
time, is revered by all. 
" O Thou, whose emissaries have failed to inform thee of 
the great carnage among the titans, who art bereft of wisdom, 
O Ravana, thou art lacking in all these great qualities. 
" Disregarding others, given up to the pleasures of the 
senses, not able to reap the advantage of time and place or 
ctiscriminate between what is good and evil, having sacrificed 
thy kingdom* thou wilt soon perish." 
Reflecting on the infirmities his sister had ascribed to him, 
Ravana, the Lord of the Titans, opulent, arrogant and powerful, 
became absorbed in thought 
7i 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 34 
Shurpanakha urges Ravana to slay Rama and wed Sita 
Hearing Shurpanakha's bitter words, Ravana surrounded by 
his ministers enquired angrily : — " Who is Rama ? What, 
is his strength ? How does he look and what is the measure 
of his prowess ? Why has he penetrated into the lonely and 
inaccessible depths of the Dandaka Forest ? With what weapons 
did he destroy the titans in that conflict, slaying Khara and 
Dushana as also Trishiras ? Tell me truly, O Lovely One, 
who has disfigured thee ? " 
Thus addressed by the Lord of the Titans, Shurpanakha 
in a transport of rage began to relate the history of Rama. 
She said : " Rama, the son of King Dasaratha, resembles 
the God of Love ; his arms are long, his eyes large ; clad in 
robes of bark and a black antelope skin, bearing a bow encircled 
with gold like unto Indra's, he lets fly blazing arrows resembling 
venomous snakes. Emitting a great shout, he discharges his 
formidable shafts, and in the struggle I could not distinguish 
him but beheld the host being decimated under the rain of 
his arrows, as the harvest is destroyed by the hail sent by 
Indra. In a short space, single-handed, standing alone, he 
slew fourteen thousand titans with Khara and Dushana, thus 
bringing peace to the sages in the Dandaka Forest and deliver ing them from fear. Chivalrous of soul, Rama, the Knower of 
Self, would not countenance the slaying of a woman and, 
having been mutilated at his command, I escaped. 
" His brother, endowed with great valour, is renowned for 
his virtue ; his name is Lakshmana and he is devoted to Rama. 
Full of fire, indomitable, victorious, powerful, intelligent and 
wise, he is his right hand and his very life's breath. And 
Rama's virtuous, tender and wedded wife, of large eyes, whose 
face resembles the full moon, is ever engaged in what is pleas ing to her lord. With her lovely locks, well-formed nose, 
beautiful shoulders and her grace and dignity, one would deem 
72 
ARANYA KANDA 
her to be a forest divinity or Lakshmi herself. With a skin 
of the colour of molten gold, nails that are rosy and long, 
that surpassingly lovely woman is Sita, the slender-waisted 
Princess of Videha. No woman so beautiful has ever appeared 
in the world, either among the Gods, Gandharvas, Yakshas or 
Kinneras. He whose wife Sita becomes and whom she will 
warmly embrace will live in the world more happily than 
Purandara. With her natural amiability, her marvellous 
beauty, which is without equal on earth, she would prove a 
worthy consort for rhfe, and thou too art fit to be her lord. 
It was to bring thee this lady of shapely hips, softly rounded 
breasts and charming features, that I put forth my endeavours, 
when, O Mighty-armed One, I was mutilated by the ruthless 
Lakshmana ! 
" When thou dost behold Vaidehi, whose countenance 
resembles the full moon, thou shalt instantly be pierced with 
the darts of the God of Love. If thou desirest to win her, 
then set off speedily on thy right foot and lay siege to her 
heart. If, O Ravana, my counsel meets with thine approval, 
then, O King of the Titans, follow it without delay. 
" Knowing the weakness of these people, O Valiant Chief 
of the Titans, make Sita, who is without blemish, thy consort. 
Hearing that Rama with his arrows that never missed their 
mark has slain the titans established in Janasthana, and of the 
death of Khara and Dushana, thou hast a duty to perform." 
chapter 35 
Ravana visits the Demon Markka once more 
Hearing the words of Shurpanakha, causing his hair to stand 
on end, Ravana dismissed his ministers and began to reflect 
on what should or should not be done. Exploring the true 
significance of the undertaking and weighing the desirability 
and undesirability of the matter, he came to the conclusion 
73 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
' Thus should I act *, and, fixed in his resolve, went secretly 
to the splendid pavilion where his chariots were heldin readiness, 
commanding his driver to bring out his car. 
At his order, the zealous charioteer, in an instant, prepared 
that superb and marvellous chariot, and Havana ascended the 
golden car set with gems, that coursed wheresoever he desired, 
to which mules in golden trappings, bearing the heads of 
goblins, were harnessed. 
Mounted on that chariot, the wheels of which made a sound 
like thunder, the younger brother of Dhanada, the God of 
Wealth, proceeded beside the Lord of Rivers and Streams 
along the seashore. 
Seated under a pure-white canopy with his white chanwaras, 
his ten heads the colour of lapis, wearing ornaments of pure 
gold, with ten necks and twenty arms, the younger brother of 
Dhanada, the enemy of the Gods, the slayer of the foremost 
among the ascetics, possessed of huge heads, like unto the 
Indra of Mountains with its ten crests, appeared beautiful, 
standing in his chariot, coursing at will like a mass of cloud, 
crowned with lightning and accompanied by a flock of cranes. 
And that Great One, endowed with prowess, beheld the 
shores of the sea with its rocks and countless trees, laden with 
fruit and flowers of every kind, bordered by lakes of limpid 
water filled with lotuses, and spacious hermitages with their 
altars and groves of plantain trees lending brilliance to the 
scene, which was enhanced by blossoming Coconut, Sala, 
Tala and Tamala trees. 
These places had been rendered illustrious by the presence 
of thousands of great Rishis of rigid penance and Nagas, 
Suparnas, Gandharvas and Kinneras ; they were rendered 
pleasant by Siddhas and Charanas, who were fully self-subdued 
and those descendants of Brahma who derived their nutriment 
from the solar rays and those who lived on a bare subsistence 
such as the Ajas, Vaikhanasas, Mashas, Valakhilyas and 
Marichipas.1 Countless nymphs of celestial beauty, adorned 
with garlands and jewels, beguiled them with every kind of 
pastime in which they excelled., and the auspicious consorts of 
the Gods honoured them by dwelling amongst them, whilst 
1 See under ' ascetics ' in Glossary. 
74 
ARANYA KANDA 
Danavas and other Celestial Beings who fed on Amrita fre quented that place. Swans, cranes, pelicans and waterfowl 
disported themselves on the emerald sward, wet and shining 
with the sea mist; spacious cars festooned with celestial 
garlands from which strains of sweet music issued, flew here 
and there at the will of those who had conquered the worlds 
by their austerities, together with Gandharvas and Apsaras. 
Ravana surveyed countless forests of sandalwood, whose 
roots were full of fragrant sap, delighting the olfactory sense, 
and groves of excellent Agallocha and Takkola trees with pear 
trees and bushes of black pepper and heaps of pearls lying on 
the shore, and coral reefs and gold and silver promontories, 
tumbling cataracts of crystal water and cities filled with grain 
and treasure, where the pearls of womanhood could be seen 
and which were thronged with horses, elephants and chariots. 
On the shores of the ocean, the Lord of the Titans beheld 
a level and charming spot over which cool breezes blew 
resembling heaven itself, in the centre of which grew a great 
fig tree, like a bright cloud, where many sages sheltered, and 
on every side its branches stretched to a distance of several 
yojanas. It was there that the mighty Garuda brought a huge 
elephant and a giant tortoise in his claws, wishing to devour 
them among the branches, but the bough broke under the 
weight of that enormous bird, and the Vaikhanasas, Mashas, 
Valakhilyas, Marichipas Ajas and Dhumras being assembled 
there, Garuda had compassion on them and transported the 
branch together with the elephant and tortoise in one claw 
to a distance of one hundred yojanas, where that excellent 
bird regaled himself on their flesh. 
Destroying the empire of the Nishadas with the severed 
branch, thus delivering the sages, his joy was re-doubled and 
his energy increased, whereupon filled with strength he resolved 
to steal the Nectar of Immortality. Having broken the iron 
bars, he entered the jewelled keep and bore away the Amrita 
from that place where it had been hidden by the mighty Indra. 
It was this same Nyagrodha tree, frequented by groups of 
great sages, that still bore the marks of Suparna and was called 
' Subhadra *, that the younger brother of Dhanada now saw 
before him. 
75 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Passing over to the further side of that Lord of the Waters, 
the Ocean, Ravana saw a solitary hermitage, an ancient and 
holy retreat in the middle of a forest. There he found the 
Demon Maricha clad in a black antelope skin, wearing matted 
locks and given up to the practice of asceticism. 
Ravana having approached him, Maricha, according to 
tradition, entertained him in many ways not known to man. 
Placing pure food and water before his sovereign, he humbly 
addressed him saying : — 
" Is all well with Lanka, O Chief of the Titans ? With what 
purpose hast thou come hither again so speedily ? " 
On hearing this enquiry, the mighty and eloquent Ravana 
answered in this wise : — 
chapter 36 
Ravana reveals his Project to the Demon Maricha 
" O Maricha, listen to me as I relate everything to thee ! O 
My Child, I am deeply afflicted and thou alone canst temper 
my distress ! 
" Thou art conversant with Janasthana, it was there that my 
brother Khara, the long-armed Dushana, my sister Shur panakha and the powerful Trishiras and other flesh-eating 
titans, prowlers of the night, had at my command taken up 
their residence, in order to harass the sages in that vast forest, 
who were engaged in their austerities. 
" Fourteen thousand titans of terrible deeds, full of courage 
and supremely skilled, dwelt in Janasthana under the leadership 
of Khara. These powerful warriors assembled there, met 
with Rama in the field. Furnished with every kind of weapon, 
clad in mail, and headed by Khara, they were assailed by the 
infuriated Rama, without a single provocative word having 
been uttered, who directed the arrows of his bow against 
them, and under the fiery darts of a mere mortal, fighting 
single-handed and on foot, those fourteen thousand titans of 
great prowess fell ; Khara perished in that struggle and Dushana 
76 
ARANYA KANDA 
was laid low with Trishiras also j peace was thus established in 
the Dandaka Forest. 
" Having been exiled to the forest with his wife by an out raged sire, that insignificant mortal, Rama, the obloquy of the 
warrior class, a man without moral principle, ruthless, 
passionate, fanatical, acquisitive and a slave to his senses, 
dwells in his hermitage, having forsworn his duty. Essentially 
unjust, seeking to harm others without cause, depending on 
his own strength alone, he has mutilated my sister by cutting 
off her ears and nose. 
" I have resolved to carry off his consort, Ska, by force, who 
resembles a daughter of the Gods, and I now solicit thine aid 
in this undertaking. O Hero, I with my brothers have nothing 
to fear from the Gods, therefore do thou accompany me as 
a loyal ally; O Titan; thou hast no equal in pride and courage 
in battle and in strategy ; thou art also a master, being versed 
in the laws of magic. 
" Learn from me how thou canst best assist me ! Assuming 
the form of a golden deer, flecked with silver, do thou pass to 
and fro near Rama's hermitage in the presence of Sita. Seeing 
that lovely doe, assuredly Sita will say to her lord and 
Lakshmana : — ' Do ye capture it ! * 
" When they are far distant and, by good fortune, Sita is 
left alone, I shall bear her away without hindrance, as Rahu 
devours the splendour of the moon. The abduction of his 
consort will cause Rama to die of grief, and I shall regain my 
happiness and security in a heart wholly satisfied ! " 
Hearing these words concerning Sita, the benevolent features 
of Maricha wilted with terror and, passing his tongue over 
his dry lips, with a fixed gaze like unto one dead, he regarded 
Ravana. Filled with dread, knowing well the defence of the 
forest to be valiantly upheld by Rama, with joined palms 
Maricha addressed Ravana in words tending to his welfare : — 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 3 7 
Markka seeks to persuade Ravana from his Purpose 
Hearing the words of that Sovereign of the Titans, the wise 
and eloquent Maricha answered him, saying : — 
" O King, those who have recourse to flattery are easy to 
find, but rare are those who are willing to listen to that speech 
which is severe yet salutory. Assuredly thou dost not know 
Rama and art not conversant with his great qualities, which 
equal those of Mahendra and Varuna. 
" Thou art thoughtless and thy spies are incompetent ; how 
canst thou dwell in security with thy titans, O Friend ? Is 
not Rama in his wrath able to rid the world of titans ? Will 
not the daughter of Janaka prove to be that which will determine 
thy death ? Will not Sita become the cause of a great catastrophe? 
" Will not the city of Lanka perish with thee and thy titans, 
since it has thee who followest the dictates of thy passions, 
who art a slave to thy senses and who knowest no restraint, 
as its lord ? An unprincipled monarch, such as thou, is the 
slave of his desires and in his perversity heeds only evil counsels, 
thus placing his subjects and his kingdom in jeopardy. 
" Rama has neither been disowned by his sire, nor is he 
unfaithful to his duty, nor is he avaricious nor wicked, nor the 
obloquy of the warrior caste. The son of Kaushalya is neither 
void of loyalty nor of other virtues, nor is he given to anger, 
nor does he seek to harm others. Knowing his father to be 
deceived by Kaikeyi, yet filled with filial devotion he said ' I 
will redeem his pledge ' and went into exile to the forest. 
To please Kaikeyi and his father Dasaratha, he renounced his 
throne and prerogatives in order to enter the Dandaka Forest. 
Rama is neither passionate nor is he an ignorant man, whose 
senses are unsubdued ; what has been related to thee is false 
and should never have been uttered. Rama is duty personified; 
he is virtuous, and this great hero is the Lord of the World, 
as Indra is the Chief of the Gods. By virtue of her chastity and 
her devotion, Vaidehi protects Rama as Prabha the Sun, how 
78 
ARANYA KANDA 
canst thou think of bearing her away by force ? Do not enter 
the inextinguishable fire of Rama, who on the battlefield 
employs his shafts as names and his bow as fuel. No matter 
how great thine anger, it behoveth thee not to approach that 
invincible warrior, bearing his bow, his countenance inflamed 
with ire, furnished with every weapon, the Destroyer of his 
Foes ! 
" Unless thou art willing to forfeit thy kingdom, thine 
happiness and life itself, that is dear to all, do not approach 
Rama, who resembles Antaka himself. How canst thou bear 
away the daughter of Janaka from the forest, who is protected 
by Rama's bow of immeasurable power ? The beloved spouse 
of that Lion among Men, whose chest is broad, is dearer to 
him than his own life, and she is wholly devoted to him. The 
Princess of Mithila of slender waist will never be torn from 
the arms of that great warrior who resembles a flame in a lit 
brazier. 
" Why enter upon such a vain endeavour, O Great King ? 
Should Rama single thee out on the battlefield, all would be 
over with thee. Since it concerns thy life, thy fortune and 
thy kingdom, heretofore invincible, take counsel with thy 
ministers with Bibishana at their head. In honour reflect and 
weigh carefully the merits and demerits, gain and loss, of this 
matter. Compare thy valour with that of Raghava ! Con sider what is to thine advantage and then do what thou thinkest 
right. It does not appear fitting to me, that thou shouldst 
meet the son of the King of Koshala on the battlefield. I 
counsel thee for thine own good, O King of the Night Rangers!" 
CHAPTER 38 
Maricha describes his first Encounter with Rama 
" O King, formerly I possessed great powers and ranged the 
earth in a body resembling a mountain, endowed with the 
strength of a thousand elephants. In colour like a dark cloud, 
wearing bracelets of fine gold, my brow encircled by a diadem, 
79 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
armed with a club, I sowed terror in the hearts of all creatures. 
" Wandering in the Dandaka Forest, I fed on the flesh of 
ascetics, and the great and virtuous Sage Vishwamitra, alarmed, 
went in person to King Dasaratha and addressed that Indra 
among men, saying : — ' Let Rama protect me with vigilance 
on the day of sacrifice ! O Chief of Men, I fear Maricha 
exceedingly.' 
" To these words, the righteous monarch Dasaratha answered 
that illustrious ascetic, Vishwamitra, saying : — ' Raghava is not 
yet twelve years old and is not skilled in the use of weapons, 
but I myself will lead an army composed of four angas1 against 
those Prowlers of the Night, O Thou Best of Ascetics and will 
destroy thine adversary in accord with thy desire ! ' 
" Thus addressed by the King, Vishwamitra answered : — 
" * Verily thou wert the refuge of the Gods and thine exploits 
are renowned in the Three Worlds, yet, however powerful 
thine army, none but Rama on this earth has the power to 
overcome these demons. Do thou therefore remain here, O 
Scourge of Thy Foes ! Though still a child, Rama is fully 
able to subdue the demons, I shall therefore take him with 
me ; may all be well with thee ! ' 
" Having spoken thus, the Sage Vishwamitra, highly gratified, 
took the king's son with him to his hermitage. 
" In the forest of Dandaka he initiated the traditional sacrifices, 
whilst Rama, with his bow strung in readiness, remained close 
at hand. Yet a child, with his dark skin of bluish hue and his 
shining glances, clothed in a simple tunic, bearing his bow, 
his locks tied in a knot, wearing a golden chain, he illumined 
the Dandaka Forest with his radiance, like unto the new moon 
about to rise. 
" At that instant, full of power and proud of the boons won 
from Brahma, shining like a cloud and wearing golden earrings, 
I entered the hermitage. Seeing me, Rama took up his 
arrow and placed it on the string of his bow with care. In 
mine ignorance I passed him by, deeming him to be but a 
child and rushed towards the altar where Vishwamitra stood. 
Thereupon Rama let loose a sharp arrow fatal to his foes, 
and striking me, hurled me into the sea, a distance of a hundred 
1 Divisions — see Glossary. 
ARANYA KANDA 
yojanas ! O Friend, the valiant Rama, having no wish to kill 
me, spared my life, but overwhelmed by the violence of the 
blow I lost consciousness and was thrown into the depths of 
the sea. After a long while, recovering my senses, I returned 
to Lanka. Though my life had been spared, yet my companions, 
who went to mine aid were all slain by the child Rama of 
imperishable deeds, who proved himself a master in the science 
of archery. 
" If, setting me aside, thou dost pit thyself against him, then 
thou shalt surely draw down an immediate, dreadful and 
inescapable retribution, not to be eschewed. 
" The titans who know of nought but diversions and enter tainments of every kind and who dream only of assemblies and 
festivities will be plunged in fruitless misery. 
" On account of Sita, the City of Lanka, with its temples 
and palaces, encrusted with every kind of gem, will be razed 
to the ground under thine eyes. 
" Even those who are pious and innocent, suffer for the 
misdeeds of others through their contact, as fish in a snake* 
infested lake. 
" Their limbs perfumed with divine sandal-paste, wearing 
celestial ornaments, thou shalt see the titans lying on the earth 
on account of thy folly. The survivors with their consorts, 
save those who have been borne away, will flee in all directions, 
unable to find refuge. Under a hail of arrows, ringed in 
flames, thou shalt see the edifices of Lanka burnt to ashes. 
" O King, there is no greater sin than consorting with 
another's wife; thou hast thousands of concubines in thy 
train ; therefore, cleaving to thy lawful consorts, preserve thy 
line, thine honour, fortune, kingdom and thy life. If thou 
desirest to live happily with thy wives and friends, do not enter 
into conflict with Rama. 
" If, despite my friendly counsels, thou dost bear Sita away 
by force, then thou and thy kinsmen, together with thine 
whole army will surely descend to the region of Yama under 
Rama's deadly shafts." 
THE RAA1AYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 39 
Marietta again seeks to dissuade Ravana from pursuing his Design 
" O Ravana I have told thee how my life was spared ; now 
hear what happened further. 
" X was in no way daunted by this event and, accompanied 
by two demons, I entered the forest of Dandaka disguised as 
a deer. There I roamed about living on the flesh of ascetics, 
visiting the sacred retreats, the sacrificial fires and places of 
worship, sowing terror amongst the sages, whom I persecuted. 
Growing exceedingly rapacious, I slew those ascetics, drinking 
their blood and devouring their flesh, my cruelty rendering 
me the terror of all the inhabitants of the forest. 
" As I roamed here and there throwing obstacles in the 
way of the religious rites, Z encountered Rama living a life of 
asceticism with the blessed Sita and the mighty Lakshmana, 
engaged in pious practices and devoted to the welfare of all. 
" Filled with contempt for the mighty Rama, who had 
retired to the forest, and reflecting : ( So he has now become 
an ascetic,' I, remembering my former defeat, rilled with 
anger, rushed at him with lowered horns, in my folly desiring 
to kill him. But he, swift as Suparna or Anila, drawing his 
great bow, loosed three sharp and deadly arrows, and these 
dread shafts with burnished points resembling lightning, flew 
off as one, thirsting for blood. 
" Knowing Rama's skill and prowess from former times and 
.recognising the peril in which I stood, I ran away and escaped, 
but the two titans who accompanied me were slain. Having 
with supreme difficulty evaded Rama's arrows thus preserving 
my life, I retired to this place, adopting the path of an ascetic 
and practising Yoga. From that day, I behold Rama, clothed 
in bark, wearing a black antelope skin, bearing his bow, in 
every tree, like unto the God of Death himself carrying his 
noose ! In my terror, I see thousands of Ramas, O Ravana I 
The whole forest assumes the form of Rama and even in 
82 
ARANYA KANDA 
deserted places I behold him .' O Chief of the Titans, in sleep 
also he appear to me and I start up in fear. Such is the terror 
he inspires in me, that even those words beginning with the 
syllable * Ra ', such as * Ratna '] and * Ratha V fill me with 
alarm. 
" Having recognized the prowess of that descendant of Raghu, 
I am persuaded that thou art not able to withstand him in 
combat, when even Bali and Namuchi succumbed to him. 
Whether thou dost enter into conflict with him or makest thy 
peace, do not speak his name to me, if thou wouldst see me live! 
" In this world, there are countless virtuous souls engaged 
in the practice of Yoga, fulfilling their every duty, who yet 
perish with those about them through another's fault. I too, 
therefore, should be doomed to die for another's misdeeds ! 
O Ranger of the Night, do what thou deemest to be right, 
but follow thee I will not. Truly Rama, who is full of zeal, 
courage and prowess, will prove to be the destroyer of the 
titans of this world. Though the wicked-minded Khara of 
Janasthana was slain by him on account of Shurpanakha, 
how, in truth, is he to blame for that ? 
" I have uttered these words for thy good and the good of 
thy kinsmen ; if thou disregardest them, thou and thy people 
will assuredly perish in combat with Rama ! " 
chapter 40 
Havana's Wrath 
As one about to die refuses a remedy, so did Ravana repudiate 
Maricha's judicious and opportune words and, having listened 
to this salutory discourse, replied in harsh and ill-considered 
accents, saying : — 
" Thou Wretch, what thou hast spoken will bear no fruit, 
as seed that is sown on barren soil comes to nought, nor will 
it alter my determination to enter into combat with Rama, 
who is but a witless and insignificant creature. 
' Ratna — Necklace. 
• Ratha— Chariot. 
83 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
" In thy presence I shall bear away the beloved wife of 
Rama, the slayer of Khara, who has renounced father, mother, 
kingdom and friends for a woman of no account. O Maricha, 
my mind is fixed ; neither Gods nor titans nor Indra himself 
can alter my resolve. 
" It is proper, when asked, to put forward the advantages 
and disadvantages of a project and what will best serve or 
injure a purpose ; a wise minister, questioned by his sovereign, 
seeking his master's good, will answer with due deference, 
standing before him with joined palms, in words fitting to the 
occasion, but a gloomy discourse does not please a monarch, 
who, having regard to his dignity, is thereby affronted. 
" Kings of limitless power represent the five Gods : Agni, 
Indra, Soma, Yama and Varuna, symbolising ardour, valour, 
gentleness, retribution and forgiveness ; therefore at all times 
they should be honoured and revered. Thou, nevertheless, 
disregarding thy duty, dost only manifest arrogance. Thou to 
whom I have come as a guest hast treated me as a miscreant. 
I have not consulted thee regarding what is expedient or 
proper, O Titan, I ask thee for thy support in this enterprise. 
Hear how thou canst assist me. 
" Assuming the form of a golden deer studded with silver, 
proceed to Rama's hermitage and pass to and fro before 
Vaidehi ; after captivating her, thou canst depart. Seeing thee 
transformed into a deer by thy magic power, Vaidehi struck 
with wonder, will instantly call on Rama to capture thee. 
When Kakutstha is far away, having left the hermitage, do 
thou, imitating his voice, utter such cries as : ' O Sita ! O 
Lakshmana ! ' 
" At this call, urged on by Sita, Saumitri, in fraternal love, 
being perturbed, will hastily follow in Rama's wake. Kakutstha 
and Lakshmana being both far distant, I shall bear Sita away, 
as the thousand-eyed God carried off Sachi. Having accom plished this according to my design, I shall confer half my 
kingdom on thee, O Titan. 
H O Friend, do thou pursue the path which leads to the 
success of this enterprise and I will follow in my chariot. 
Obtaining possession of Sita without a struggle by deceiving 
Rama, I shall return to Lanka with thee, my purpose fulfilled. 
84 
ARANYA KANDA 
" If thou dost not obey me, even against thine inclination, 
O Maricha, I shall slay thee instantly ! I shall compel thee! 
None can attain happiness and prosperity by opposing his 
sovereign's will. Verily by coming before Rama thou dost risk 
thy life, but certain death awaits thee if thou oppose me; 
therefore reflect carefully on what is most expedient, and do 
what thou deemest proper." 
chapter 41 
Maricha counsels Havana further 
Thus commanded by the imperious King of the Titans, 
Maricha replied in bold and fearless tones, saying : — 
" What wretch has counselled thee to take this course, which 
will lead to thine extinction, together with thy children, thy 
kingdom and thy counsellors, O Ranger of the Night? O 
King, who is that evil person, envious of thy good fortune, 
who seeks to open the portals of death to thee ? Assuredly he 
is thine enemy, who in his impotence plots thy defeat under 
the blows of a superior antagonist. What miscreant of evil 
intent seeks to propel thee along the path of self-destruction ? 
The counsellors, who do not dissuade thee from thy fell design, 
merit death and yet live. Upright ministers ever restrain a 
king, who following his own desires, enters on an evil path. 
Thou who should thus be guided art blind. 
" By the grace of their sovereign, ministers attain justice, 
profit, pleasure and renown, but these objects are never found, 
O Ravana, if a king be lacking in virtue, and his people suffer 
nought but misfortune. 
" O Thou, Foremost of Conquerors, the king is the root of 
the righteousness and good repute of his subjects, he should 
therefore always be protected by them. No kingdom survives 
under a sovereign who is violent, overbearing and intemperate, 
O Ranger of the Night. Those ministers who counsel violence 
perish with their chief, as a chariot is precipitated into an 
abyss by a reckless driver. Many pious persons in this world, 
85 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
engaged in their duties, have met with destruction with their 
relatives through the fault of others. A cruel despot is as unable 
to protect his subjects as a jackal is unable to defend a herd 
of deer. The titans, whose lord thou art, foolish, ruthless and 
a slave to thy passions, are doomed. 
"It is not I who should be pitied for this unexpected 
calamity that has overtaken me, but thou, who with thine 
army will soon meet with destruction. Having been struck 
down by Rama, he will speedily despatch thee. My mission 
accomplished, I shall meet my death under the blows of thine 
adversary. Rest assured that I shall perish as soon as I appear 
before Rama and know well that the abduction of Sita will 
cost thee thy life as well as that of thy kinsmen. 
" If thou succeedest in bearing Sita away from the hermitage 
with mine aid, it is the end of thee, of Lanka and of the titans. 
" Though seeking thy good and desiring to be of assistance 
to thee, thou dost disregard my words, as those for whom the 
last hour has struck do not heed the counsel of their friends." 
CHAPTER 42 
Marietta assuming the form of a Deer goes to the Hermitage 
Having addressed these bitter words to Ravana, Maricha, full 
of apprehension, said : — " Let us go, but know that when I 
come before that warrior furnished with arrows, sword and 
bow, which he will wield to my destruction, my life is forfeit ! 
Nay, he who opposes Rama will not return alive ! For thee 
he will prove the Rod of Death and thou shalt fall beneath his 
blows. In what way can I further thine evil design ? Yet 
I will go. May prosperity attend thee, O Ranger of the Night! " 
Highly gratified by these words, Ravana, embracing him 
warmly, addressed him in honeyed accents, saying : — 
" This magnanimity is worthy of thee ; now that thou art 
willing to accede to my request I know thee truly to be Maricha; 
heretofore another demon addressed me. Do thou with me 
ascend my winged chariot, encrusted with gems, to which 
86 
ARANYA KANDA 
mules with goblins' heads are harnessed. Having captivated 
Vaidehi in accord with my desire, fly thence, and she, being 
left alone, will be forcibly borne away by me." 
" Be it so ", answered Tataka's son, whereupon Ravana 
mounted the chariot resembling a celestial car, and leaving that 
solitary place set out with all speed. Looking down on many 
villages, forests, mountains, rivers, kingdoms and cities, they 
finally reached the forest of Dandaka in which Rama's hermitage 
stood. Descending from the golden car, the Lord of the 
Titans, accompanied by Maricha, beheld Rama's retreat and 
taking that demon by the hand, Ravana said to him : — 
" Here is Rama's hermitage shaded by palm trees ; now 
accomplish the purpose for which we have come hither." 
Hearing Ravana's words, Maricha in an instant transformed 
himself into a deer and began to pace to and fro before Rama's 
hermitage. 
Assuming a marvellous form, wonderful to behold, the 
points of his horns studded with gems, his skin dappled, his 
mouth like a red lotus, his ears azure-tinted, his neck out stretched, his belly of a sapphire hue, his hanks the colour of 
the Madhuka flower, shining like the filaments of the Kanja 
flower, his hoofs like emerald, his legs slender and well proportioned, his haunches gleaming with all the colours of 
the rainbow, that demon in an instant had become a ravishing 
gazelle of iridescent hue, studded with every kind of gem, of 
exceeding beauty. The whole forest and Rama's enchanting 
retreat were rilled with the radiance of that form, wonderful 
to behold, that had been assumed by the titan. 
In order to capture the glances of Vaidehi with his shimmering 
colours, he strayed here and there in the grass among the 
flowers. His skin was stippled with hundreds of silver spots, 
giving him an enchanting appearance, as he wandered about 
nibbling the green shoots of the trees. 
Approaching the circle of palm trees, he passed slowly here 
and there between the Karnikara trees in the hermitage, some times appearing in full view of Sita. That charming fawn of 
many colours strayed hither and thither in the vicinity of 
Rama's ashrama, coming and going at will, sometimes dis appearing into the distance, then drawing near again, gambolling 
87 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
playfully, thereafter crouching on the earth, or following a 
herd of deer ; then again it would appear at their head, and 
by every means this titan, in the form of a gazelle describing 
a thousand frolicsome circles, sought to attract the attention 
of Sita. The other fawns, approaching, snuffed its scent 
and then scattered in all directions, but that demon, who 
formerly had taken delight in slaying them, now, in order 
not to betray his real nature, abstained from molesting those 
who approached him. 
Meantime Vaidehi of brilliant glances was engaged in 
gathering flowers, diverting herself in the midst of the Karnikara, 
Ashoka and Cuta trees that she loved so well. As she wandered 
here and there plucking the blossoms, that princess of tender 
looks, who did not merit exile in the forest, saw before her the 
fawn studded with precious gems, its limbs encrusted with 
diamonds and pearls. Beholding that doe, with its beautiful 
teeth and tips, its skin the colour of silver, the slender-waisted 
Sita opened her eyes wide in wonder and delight, and the 
marvellous fawn, seeing Rama's beloved consort, continued to 
pace to and fro before her, illumining the forest. Looking at 
that deer, never before seen by man, Sita, the daughter of 
Janaka, was amazed. 
CHAPTER 43 
Sita is enamoured of the Fawn 
Then the lovely Sita, of flawless limbs and skin of a pure 
golden hue, gathering flowers, beheld that ravishing fawn with 
gold and silver flanks, and highly delighted called to her Lord 
and Lakshmana, who were furnished with weapons, saying : — 
" O Prince, do thou come quickly with thy younger brother ! " 
Thus she cried again and again, while continuing to watch the 
deer, and at her call those two lions among men, Rama and 
Lakshmana turned their eyes in that direction and beheld the 
fawn. 
88 
ARANYA KANDA 
Astounded, Lakshmana exclaimed : — " Undoubtedly the 
titan Maricha has assumed the form of a deer. Kings who 
hunt in the forest, lured by this deceptive snape, are slain by 
him and, O Rama, this brilliant fawn, whose radiance rivals 
the sun, is the device of a magician ; such a deer does not 
exist on earth, O Master of the World, it is an illusion, born 
of cunning." 
As Lakshmana was speaking thus, Sita with a delighted 
smile interrupted him and being wholly captivated by this 
phantom, said : — 
" O Son of a King, this marvellous fawn has taken possession 
of my heart ; take it captive, O Great Warrior, it will serve as 
a plaything. Many beautiful creatures, lovely to look upon, 
range the forest in the vicinity of our hermitage, such as 
Chamaras, Srimaras and Rikshas, while troops of Prishatas, 
Vanaras and Kinneras disport themselves here, but O Long armed Heroes full of grace and strength, I have never seen 
a wild creature whose brilliance and gentle nimble ways are 
equal to this wonderful fawn's. With its slender many-coloured 
body encrusted with gems, it illumines the whole forest around 
me with a lustre resembling the moon's. What beauty ! 
What resplendence ! What grace ! What radiance ! This 
marvellous fawn with its graceful limbs possesses me utterly. 
If thou art able to capture it alive, it will prove an object of 
supreme wonder in the hermitage and when our exile is over 
it will be an ornament to the palace of the queens. 
" O Lord ! Prince Bharata and my mothers, seeing this 
celestially beautiful deer, will be struck with amazement. If 
thou art not able to capture this wonderful fawn alive, its 
skin will be most precious, O Lion among Men. I shall delight 
to sit on its golden hide, strewn with kusha grass. I crave 
pardon if this cruel wish may seem unworthy of a woman, 
but the beauty of the deer excites my admiration ! " 
This graceful creature with its golden skin, its horns set 
with precious gems, shilling tike the rising sun or the Milky 
Way, captivated Rama himself, who, hearing Ska's words, 
yielded to her wish and gaily addressed Lakshmana, saying : — 
" O Lakshmana, mark how this deer has excited Vaidehi's 
desire. On account of its supreme beauty this fawn will lose 
89 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
its life to-day. Neither in the forest, nor in the region of 
Nandana, nor in the solitude of Chaitaratha, nor anywhere on 
earth does such a fawn exist. 
" See how, whichever way its velvety striped skin is brushed, 
it glistens. When it opens its mouth, its tongue shoots forth 
like a bright name in a lit brazier or lightning from a cloud. 
With its head of emerald and crystal, its belly shining like 
mother of pearl, whose heart would it not steal away with its 
indescribable beauty ? Who, on beholding this divine apparition, 
shining like gold, covered with every kind of gem, would not 
be charmed? 
" It is for food and sport that kings, bearing their bows, 
hunt wild beasts in the forest, and many treasures of different 
kinds are found there by chance, such as pearls, diamonds and 
gold, increasing man's possessions, surpassing the imagination 
of Indra, and, O Lakshmana, this is the wealth spoken of by 
those who are versed in the Artha-Shastra. 
" The slender-waisted Vaidehi will sit with me on the fleece 
of that marvellous deer ; neither the skin of Kadali, Priyaka, 
Prabeni or Abiki compares in texture to that of this deer. 
Truly exquisite, this gazelle and its counterpart1 in the heavens 
are both divine, the one amongst the stars and the other on 
earth, yet if thou art certain that this is an illusion created by 
the titan, O Lakshmana, I will destroy it. That cruel and 
evil-souled Marietta slew many great ascetics ranging in the 
forest ; innumerable kings, armed with bows, hunting here, 
have fallen under his assaults when he assumed the shape of an 
illusive deer ; let us therefore end his life. 
"Formerly Vatapi oppressed the Sages here also, and, 
entering their stomachs, emerged, riving them, as the embryo 
of a mule may cause the death of its mother. One day that 
demon encountered the great Sage Agastya, gifted with divine 
powers and was devoured by him when presented in the 
form of an offering by his brother Ilwali ; when the repast 
was concluded that titan called out * Vatapi come forth ' but 
the excellent Rishi, addressing Ilwali with a smile, said : — 
" ' Since being blinded by thy power, many illustrious sages 
1 This refers to the fifth lunar constellation Mrigashira, said to resemble a 
deer. 
ARANYA KANDA 
have fallen victim to thee on this earth; thy brother is now 
wholly consumed by me.' 
" O Lakshmana, this titan will also be annihilated like 
Vatapi for having set me at nought, who am fixed in my duty 
and master of my senses. He shall meet his end, as did 
Vatapi who defied Agastya. Do thou remain here without 
absenting thyself and guard Sita with care. It is our first 
duty, O Delight of the House of Raghu ! I shall either slay 
that deer or bring it back alive ; till I return with the deer, 
which I shall do without delay, do thou remain here with Sita, 
O Son of Sumitra. She shall have the fawn ; its skin will cost 
it its life this day. Now keep watch over Sita in the hermitage. 
Till with a single arrow I have brought down this dappled 
fawn and slain it, do thou stay here, O Lakshmana, with the 
mighty raven, Jatayu, who is strong and wise and ever engaged 
in pious acts, and protect Maithili in every way." 
CHAPTER 44 
Rama slays Markka 
Having issued this command to his brother, that invincible 
warrior, the Delight of the House of Raghu, endowed with 
great prowess, girded on his sword in its golden scabbard, and 
taking up his triply-curved bow, his personal insignia and two 
quivers filled with arrows, he set forth with long strides. 
Beholding that Indra among Men, the king of the beasts in 
fear disappeared only to re-appear once more. 
Girt with his sword and bearing his bow in his hand, Rama 
ran in the direction of the deer and beheld it in all its beauty, 
close to him. Bow in hand, fixing his eyes on the fawn as it 
fled into the forest, he saw it sometimes taking a single bound, 
and then, in order to lure him on, allowing him to draw closer. 
Timid and fearful, it would leap into the air, at times becoming 
visible and then disappearing in the depths of the thickets. 
As in the autumn, stray clouds pass across the moon's face, 
so that she sometimes shines in all her brilliance and at others 
91 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
seems far away, so appearing and disappearing, Maricha, in 
the form of a deer, enticed Rama far from the hermitage. 
Kakutstha found himself, despite his exertions, thus beguiled 
and the fawn, feigning fatigue, would crouch in the grass or, 
the better to deceive him, join a herd of deer, but when Rama 
approached, it would take to flight once more, concealing 
itself, only to re-appear in the distance. Sometimes, in fear, 
it would make itself invisible, then, with Rama in desperate 
pursuit, it would appear in a far off thicket. Thereupon 
increasingly wrath, Rama drew out a death-dealing glittering 
arrow more brilliant than the sun's rays and placing it firmly 
on his bow, stretching it with great energy, let fly that shaft 
that resembled a fiery serpent. 
Loosing that flaming arrow, which resembled a lightning 
flash, fashioned by Brahma himself, that marvellous shaft, 
pierced the heart of Maricha, who had assumed the form of 
a deer. Thereat, bounding into the air as high as a palm tree, 
the titan fell mortally wounded and lay on the earth, having 
but a few moments to live. On the point of death, emitting 
a terrible cry, Maricha abandoned his assumed form. 
Recollecting the words of Ravana and reflecting on how to 
induce Sita to send away Lakshmana, so that in her isolation 
she might be borne away, Maricha, deeming the moment to be at 
hand, imitating Rama's voice, cried out " O Sita, O Lakshmana ! " 
Stricken to the heart by that extraordinary arrow, discarding 
his deer's form, Maricha took on the huge shape of a titan. 
Then Rama, beholding that titan of formidable size, writhing 
on the earth about to die, his limbs covered with blood, 
remembered the words of Lakshmana and reflected : — " The 
illusion created by Maricha, spoken of by Lakshmana is 
manifest, it is Maricha whom I have slain. What will Ska 
not do on hearing the cry of the stricken titan : ( O Sita, O 
Lakshmana ' ? To what a pass will the mighty Lakshmana 
now have come ? " 
Thus did the virtuous Rama reflect, his hair standing on 
end and, having slain the titan in the form of a deer and heard 
his cry, a great dread seized him. 
That dappled fawn being slain, Rama speedily killed and seized 
the carcase of another deer and hastened towards the hermitage. 
92 
ARANYA KANDA 
CHAPTER 45 
Sita sends Lakskmana to Rama's Assistance 
Hearing that cry of distress, which seems to come from her 
lord, Sita said to Lakshmana : — 
" Dost thou not recognise the voice of Raghava ? Go quickly 
and see what has befallen him. Hearing his cry, my heart is 
filled with anxiety ; he must be in great peril to call out thus ; 
go to the assistance of thy brother, he is in need of thee. He 
has been overpowered by the titans like a bull by lions." 
Recollecting Rama's command, Lakshmana withstood Sita's 
appeal and did not move, whereupon Janaki, highly provoked, 
said to him : — 
" O Son of Sumitra, under the guise of affection thou dost 
show emnity towards thy brother, since thou dost not instantly 
proceed to his aid ! Because of me, Rama is about to die ! 
In thy desire to possess me, thou dost refuse to follow Raghava; 
thou dost welcome his death and hast no affection for him. 
It is for this reason that thou dost remain indifferent to his 
plight ; if he is in peril, of what use is my life ? It is on his 
account that I came hither," 
Thus, weeping and overcome with grief, did Vaidehi speak, 
and Lakshmana answering her, who was trembling luce a 
frightened doe, said : — 
" O Vaidehi, neither serpents, titans, celestial beings, Gods, 
giants nor demons can overcome thy lord. Assuredly, O 
Princess, among Gods and Kinneras, wild beasts and goblins, 
there are none who can stand against Rama in battle. O 
Beautiful One, he who is equal to Indra is invincible. Do not 
speak thus t I dare not leave thee alone in the forest without 
Rama. 
" Even the Three Worlds and the Gods, with Indra Himself 
at their head, meeting Rama in combat, would be overcome 
by him, therefore calm thyself and banish all fear. Thy lord 
will soon return, having killed the marvellous deer ; that voice 
93 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
is assuredly not his, nor that of a God ; it is an illusion, like 
the city of the Gandharvas and has been produced by the 
titan. 
" O Vaidehi, thou hast been left in my charge by the magnani mous Rama. O Fair One, I dare not leave thee here alone. 
We are an object of hatred to the titans since the slaying of 
Khara and the destruction of Janasthana. The titans are able 
to simulate the voices of others in the great forest and delight 
in doing so in order to trouble the virtuous. O Vaidehi, have 
no anxiety ! " 
At these words, Sita, her eyes flashing with anger, answered: — 
" O Thou Evil-hearted Wretch, Obloquy of thy Race, who 
delightest in Rama's misfortune ! Is it a source of wonder 
that a villain such as thou, perverse, whose motives are con cealed, should speak thus in the hour of Rama's distress ? By 
an excess of perfidy, thou hast accompanied Rama to the forest 
and, practising guile, lusteth after me, while assuming the form 
of a friend ! Or hast thou been engaged by Bharata as his 
agent? Thy design as also Bharata's, shall not succeed, O 
Saumitri! How should I desire another after serving the 
lotus-eyed Rama as my lord ? Rather would I yield up my life 
in thy presence, O Saumitri ; without Rama, I cannot maintain 
life on this earth for an instant." 
Hearing these cruel words, causing him to shudder, 
Lakshmana, the master of his senses, with joined palms 
answered her, saying : — 
" It is not for me to gainsay thee ; thou art as a goddess 
to me. An ill-considered utterance from a woman causes no 
surprise. Negligent in her duty, fickle and peevish, woman 
is the cause of dissension between father and son ; truly I am 
unable to endure these words of thine that pierce my ears 
like flaming darts, O Daughter of Janaka ! 0 Vaidehi, may 
all the inhabitants of the forest bear witness that to my re spectful address thou hast responded with such bitterness ! 
It will go hard with thee this day for having set me at nought, 
I, who am obedient to the behests of mine elder brother ! 
May all the Deities protect thee, O Lady of Large Eyes ! 
Sinister portents present themselves to me ! May I find thee 
safe when I return ! " 
94 
ARANYA KANDA 
At these words, the daughter of Janaka began to weep and 
scalding tears bathed her countenance as she answered : — 
" If I am separated from Rama, I shall cast myself into the 
river Godaveri ! O Lakshmana, I shall hang myself or enter 
into the fire, but I shall never approach any man other than 
Raghava ! " 
Thus protesting before Lakshmana, Sita, distraught, beat 
her breast with her hands and lamented. 
In the face of her despair, Lakshmana, distressed, sought 
to comfort her, but she refused to answer the brother of her 
lord, whereupon he, bending low before her, set out to rejoin 
Rama, looking back again and again. 
CHAPTER 46 
Havana approaches Sita 
Stung by Sita's bitter words, Lakshmana, in his ardent desire 
to rejoin his elder brother Rama, set out without further delay. 
Thereupon Ravana, in the guise of a mendicant, availing 
himself of the opportunity, rapidly approached the hermitage 
with the purpose of seeking out Vaidehi. With matted locks, 
clad in a saffron robe and carrying a triple staff and loshta, 
that highly powerful one, knowing Sita to be alone, accosted 
her in the wood, in the form of an ascetic, at dusk when dark ness shrouds the earth in the absence of the sun and moon. 
Gazing on Sita, the consort of Rama, Ravana resembled Rahu 
regarding Rohini in the absence of Shasi. 
Beholding that monstrous apparition, the leaves of the trees 
ceased to move, the wind grew still, the turbulent course of 
the river Godaveri subsided and began to flow quietly. The 
ten-headed Ravana, however, profiting by Rama's absence, 
drew near to Sita in the guise of a monk of venerable appear ance while she was overcome with grief on account of her lord. 
Approaching Vaidehi in an honourable guise, as Saturn 
draws near to the Chitra star, Ravana resembled a deep well 
95 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
overgrown with grass. He stood there gazing on the glorious 
consort of Rama of incomparable beauty, Sita, with her 
brilliant lips and teeth, her countenance as radiant as the full 
moon, seated on a carpet of leaves, overwhelmed with grief, 
weeping bitterly. 
On seeing the Princess of Videha alone, clad in a yellow 
silken sari, whose eyes resembled lotus petals, the titan, struck 
by Kama's arrow, joyfully accosted her, feigning the gentle 
accents of a brahmin. Praising her beauty, unequalled in 
the Three Worlds, which caused her to resemble Shri, he 
said: — 
" O Thou, possessed of the brilliance of gold and silver, 
who art clad in a yellow silken sari and who, like a pool of 
lilies, art wreathed in garlands of fresh flowers, art thou 
Lakshmi bereft of her lotus or Kirti or a nymph of graceful 
aspect ? Art thou Bhuti of slender hips, or Rati disporting 
herself in tht forest ? 
" How even, sharp and white are thy teeth, how large thy 
slightly reddened eyes with their dark pupils, how well pro portioned and rounded are thy thighs and how charming thy 
legs, resembling the tapering trunk of an elephant! How 
round and plump are thy cheeks, like unto the polished fruit 
of the Tala trees ; how enchanting is thy bosom, decorated 
with pearls ! 
" O Lady of Sweet Smiles, lovely teeth and expressive eyes, 
as a river sweeps away its banks with its swift current so dost 
thou steal away my heart, O Graceful One. Slender is thy 
waist, glossy thine hair, thy breasts touching each other enhance 
thy loveliness ; neither the consorts of the Gods, the Gan dharvas, the Yakshas nor the Kinneras can compare with thee. 
'Till this hour, I have never seen any on earth so perfect ; 
thy youth, thy beauty and thy grace are unequalled in the 
Three Worlds ! 
" Seeing thee dwelling here in solitude distresses my heart. 
Come with me ! It is not fitting that thou shouldst remain 
here; this place is frequented by ruthless demons, who are 
able to assume different forms at will. It is for thee to reside 
in sumptuous and delightful palaces in the vicinity of pleasant 
cities, surrounded by groves of sweet smelling shrubs and 
96 
ARANYA KANDA 
green trees, where thou canst wander clad in beautiful robes, 
decked in fragrant garlands, with a consort worthy of thy 
beauty, O Charming One. O Dark-eyed Lady of Sweet Smiles, 
art thou wedded to one of the Rudras, the Maruts or Vasus ? 
Thou appearest divine to me, yet these are not the haunts of 
the Gandharvas, Devas or Kinneras, but of the Titans. How 
hast thou come here? 
" Dost thou not fear to live amidst monkeys, lions, tigers, 
deer, wolves, bears, hyenas and leopards ? O Fair One, dost 
thou not tremble before those terrible elephants, maddened 
with the exudation of temporal juices, in this great forest ? 
Who art thou ? To whom dost thou belong ? For what reason 
dost thou range the Dandaka Forest alone, which is frequented 
by terrible titans ? " 
With these flattering words did the evil-minded Havana 
address Sita, and seeing him in the guise of a brahmin, she 
entertained him with the traditional hospitality due to an 
uninvited guest. Leading him to a seat, she brought water 
to wash his feet and offered him food, saying : — " Be pleased 
to accept this repast ! " Seeing him in the form of a Twice born with his loshta and saffron robe, unrecognizable in his 
disguise, Sita welcomed him as a true brahmin, saying : — 
" Be seated, O Brahmin, and accept this water for washing 
thy feet, also this meal, composed of ripe fruits and roasted 
grain, prepared for thee, which please enjoy." 
Thus did she receive him with hospitable words, but Ravana, 
his gaze fixed on the Princess of Mithila, determined to bear 
her away, thus preparing his own destruction. 
Sita, anxiously expecting the return from hunting of her 
illustrious lord, with Prince Lakshmana, searched the vast 
and darkening forest with her eyes but was unable to see either 
Rama or his brother there. 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 47 
The Conversation of Ravana and Sita 
Thus addressed by Ravana in the guise of a mendicant, who 
had resolved to bear her away, Sita reflected : — 
' This person is my guest and a brahmin ; if I do not answer 
him he may curse me ! ' and thinking thus, she said: — 
" May good betide thee ! I am the daughter of the high- 
souled Janaka, the King of Mithila, my name is Sita and I 
am the beloved consort of Rama. For twelve years, I dwelt 
in the palace of Ikshwaku, where all my desires were gratified 
and I enjoyed every comfort. 
" In the thirteenth year, the king with the approval of his 
ministers decided to enthrone Rama. All being ready for the 
installation of Raghava, Kaikeyi, one of my mothers-in-law, 
requested a boon of her lord. Having gratified my father-in law by her services, she extracted two promises from him, the 
exile of my husband and the installation of her son Bharata, 
saying : — ' I shall neither eat drink nor sleep if Rama is 
enthroned and it will prove the end of my life.' 
" The Lord of the Earth, my father-in-law, hearing her 
speak thus, offered her diverse gifts, but Kaikeyi refused them. 
At that time, my lord was twenty-five years old and I eighteen. 
Being loyal, virtuous, honourable and devoted to the good of 
all, my lord, Rama, endowed with long arms and large eyes, 
was renowned throughout the world. Our rather King 
Dasaratha, blinded by passion, in order to please Kaikeyi, 
did not install Rama, and when he came before his sire, in 
order to receive the crown, Kaikeyi addressed the following 
bitter words to him : — " O Ramachandra, hear from me the 
decree issued by thy father. This great kingdom is to be 
given to Bharata and thou art to dwell in the forest for fourteen 
years. Now go hence, and save thy sire from the sin of 
perjury." 
" Then the imperturbable Rama replied : * So be it * and 
acted accordingly. My lord of firm vows, accustomed to give 
98 
ARANYA KANDA 
and not to receive commands, who ever speaketh truth without 
prevarication, hearing these words acquiesced and has fulfilled 
his vow to the uttermost. His brother, the valiant Lakshraana, 
a Lion among Men and the companion of Rama in combat, 
the Destroyer of his Foes, given to asceticism, bearing his bow, 
followed Rama into exile with me. 
" Thus Raghava, fixed in his vow, wearing matted locks, 
accompanied by myself and his younger brother, penetrated 
into the depths of the forest of Dandaka. We have all three 
been banished from the kingdom by Kaikeyi and, depending 
on our own strength, wander about in the forest. Remain 
here awhile, O Foremost of the Twice-born, my lord will soon 
return with an abundance of roots and fruit and sufficient 
venison, having slain deer, kine and boar. But thou, O 
Brahmin, tell me who thou an and what thy name, family 
and lineage. Why dost thou range the Dandaka Forest alone? " 
Hearing the words of Sita, the consort of Rama, the mighty 
titan replied in these harsh words : — 
" O Sita, I am that Ravana, King of the Titans, in fear of 
whom the world, the Gods, titans and men tremble. O 
Source of Delight, since I beheld thee shining like gold, clad 
in silk, my consorts have ceased to find favour with me. Do 
thou become the chief queen of those countless women, stolen 
away from many quarters by me. 
" Lanka, my capital, set in the midst of the sea, is built on 
the summit of a hill. There, O Sita, wander with me in the 
groves and thus forget the forest. O Lovely One, if thou 
dost become my wife, five thousand servants adorned with 
diverse ornaments shall attend on thee." 
The blameless daughter of Janaka, being thus addressed by 
Ravana, was filled with indignation and answered that titan 
with contempt, saying : — 
" I am dependent on my lord, Rama, who is as steadfast 
as a rock, calm as the ocean and equal to Mahendra himself, 
Rama, endowed with every good quality, who resembles the 
Nyagrodha tree in stature. I am dependent on that illustrious 
and noble warrior, whose arms are long, whose chest is broad, 
whose gait is like a lion's, nay, who resembles that king of 
beasts ; to him, the greatest of men, I give my whole allegiance. 
99 h 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
To Rama, whose countenance resembles the full moon, the 
son of a king, master of his passions, of immeasurable renown 
and power, I shall ever remain faithful. 
" O Jackal, thou desirest a she-lion but art no more able to 
possess me than grasp the light of the sun ! Thou Wretch, 
who seekest to carry off the beloved spouse of Raghava ! Verily 
thou dost imagine the trees that thou seest before thee to be 
made of gold,1 that thou art seeking to draw the teeth of a 
famished and courageous lion, that enemy of the deer, or 
extract the fangs of a poisonous snake. Dost thou desire to 
lift up the Mandara mountain with thy bare hands or live at 
ease after drinking poison ? Thou dost seek to rub thine eyes 
with a needle and lick a razor with thy tongue ! Thou desirest 
to cross the ocean with a stone round thy neck or grasp the 
sun and moon. O Thou who seekest to bear away the beloved 
wife of Rama, thou art endeavouring to carry a blazing fire 
in thy robe or walk on iron spikes. 
" The disparity between thee and Rama is as that between 
a jackal and a lion, a brook and an ocean, the nectar of the 
Gods and sour barley gruel; between gold and iron, sandal and 
mud, an elephant and a cat, an eagle and a crow, a peacock 
and a duck, a swan and a vulture. Even shouldst thou steal 
me, if that mighty archer, Rama, whose prowess is equal to 
the Lord of a Thousand Eyes, still lives, thou wilt no more 
be able to devour me than a fly can eat the clarified butter 
into which it has fallen." 
Addressing that cruel Ranger of the Night thus, the guileless 
Sita shook like a leaf in the wind. 
Perceiving her distress, Ravana, terrible as death, began to 
boast of his race, his power, his name and his exploits, in order 
to increase her fear. 
* The trees of heU, said to be made of gold. 
too 
ARANYA KANDA 
CHAPTER 48 
Stta defies Ravana 
Provoked by Sita's proud words, Ravana, scowling, answered 
her in fierce accents : — 
" O Lady of Fair Complexion, may prosperity attend thee ! 
I am the brother of the Lord of Wealth, my name is Ravana. 
I am the mighty Dashagriva from whom, as all creatures 
before death, the Gods, Gandharvas, Pisachas, Patagas and 
Nagas flee in terror. I have subdued my blood-brother 
Kuvera, who for a certain reason I incited to combat and who, 
vanquished by me, fled in alarm from his sumptuous abode 
and sought refuge on Kailasha, the Lord of Mountains. 
" By virtue of my prowess I robbed him of his marvellous 
chariot, Pushpaka, that moves according to one's will, and in 
it I range the skies. Seeing my dread visage, the Gods with 
Indra at their head flee in terror, O Maithili. Wheresoever 
I roam, the wind blows temperately and the rays of the sun 
resemble the moon's. Where I stay, the leaves of the trees 
become motionless and the rivers cease to flow. 
" Beyond the sea stands my magnificent capital, Lanka, 
inhabited by powerful titans, equal to Indra's citadel, Amaravati. 
" That beautiful stronghold, encircled by dazzling battle ments with golden ramparts and gates of emerald, is a city of 
dreams. 
" Filled with elephants, horses and chariots, echoing to the 
sound of bugles, it is embellished by pleasant gardens planted 
with diverse trees, yielding fruit of every desirable taste. 
O Sita, OThou Daughter of a King, in that city thou shalt dwell 
with me, forgetting the lot of mortal women. There thou 
shalt taste celestial delights ! O Lady of exquisite countenance, 
think of Rama no more, who is but human and whose end is 
near. Placing his beloved son on the throne, King Dasaratha 
sent his heir of negligible prowess to the forest. What 
wouldst thou with that Rama, deprived of his kingdom, living 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
as an ascetic in solitude, O Large-eyed Beauty ? I, the Lord 
of all the titans, have come to thee in person, pierced by the 
shafts of the God of Love. It does not befit thee to disregard 
me. O Timid Lady, if thou dost pass me by, thou wilt repent, 
like Urvashi, who thrust away Puraravas with her foot. Rama 
is but a mortal and not equal to even a finger of mine in combat. 
By good fortune I have come to thee ; do thou therefore yield 
thyself to me, O Fair One." 
At these words, Vaidehi, her eyes flashing with anger, 
though alone, answered that Lord of the Titans boldly, saying: — 
" Since thou claimest to be the brother of the God, Kuvera, 
who is held in veneration by all the Celestials, how dost thou 
dare to commit this infamous deed, O Ravana ? Undoubtedly 
all the titans will meet with destruction, having so cruel, 
senseless and lustful a person as thee as their sovereign. The 
ravisher of Indra's consort, Sachi, may survive, but he who 
bears away the wife of Rama will never live in peace. O 
Titan, it were possible for the one who deprives the Bearer 
of the Thunderbolt of his consort of unsurpassed beauty to 
live on earth, but he who insults me will never escape death, 
were he to drink the water of immortality ! " 
chapter 49 
Sita's Abduction by Ravana 
Hearing those words of Sita, the mighty Ravana, striking one 
hand on the other, revealed his gigantic form and, skilled in 
speech, addressed her, saying : — 
" Methinks thou hast taken leave of thy senses, hast thou 
not heard of my great prowess and valour ? Standing in space, 
I am able to lift up the earth ; I can drink the waters of the 
ocean and destroy death himself in combat. With my shafts 
I can pierce the sun and cleave the terrestial globe. Thou, 
who dost allow thyself to be deceived by any trick and dost 
follow any whim, behold how I can change my shape at will." 
Speaking thus, Ravana, full of wrath, his eyes glowing like 
ARANYA KANDA 
burning coals, resembled a flame, and discarding his benign 
aspect, he, the younger brother of Kuvera, assumed a terrible 
shape, resembling death itself. 
With smouldering eyes, a prey to anger, resplendent in 
ornaments of fine gold, like a dark cloud, that Ranger of the 
Night appeared before her with his ten heads and twenty arms. 
Abandoning his ascetic disguise, the King of the Titans took 
on his native form ; wearing a blood-red robe, he fixed that 
pearl among women, Maithili, with his gaze, thereafter address ing her, who resembled the sun, whose hair was dark and 
who was clothed in a robe and jewels, saying : — 
" O Fair Lady, if thou desirest a master famed throughout 
the Three Worlds, then surrender thyself to me. I am a 
husband worthy of thee ; do thou serve me forever ! I shall 
do thee great honour nor will I ever displease thee. Re nouncing thine attachment to a man, place thine affection on 
me. What binds thee to Rama, O Thou Foolish One who 
deemest thyself wise ; he who has been banished from his 
domain, who has failed to fulfil his destiny and whose days 
are numbered, Rama, who on the injunction of a woman aban doned kingdom, friends and people to inhabit a forest 
frequented by wild beasts ? " 
Speaking thus to Maithili, who was worthy of tenderness 
and gentle of speech, that wicked titan, inflamed by passion, 
seized hold of her as Budha seizes Rohini. With his left 
hand he grasped the hair of the lotus-eyed Sita, and with his 
right, her thighs. Seeing Ravana with his sharp teeth like 
the peak of a mountain, resembling death itself, the Celestial 
Beings fled away in terror. Then instantly the great chariot 
belonging to Ravana, made of gold, to which braying mules 
were harnessed, appeared and, addressing Sita in harsh tones, 
he lifted her up and, clasping her, ascended the car. 
Then the virtuous and unfortunate Sita, being overpowered 
by the titan, began to cry aloud, " Rama ! Rama ! n but he 
was far away in the depths of the forest. Though she possessed 
no love for him, Ravana, burning with passion, rose high into 
the air with her, as she struggled like the consort of the Indra 
of Serpents. 
Seeing herself borne through the air by the King of the 
103 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Titans, Sita with piercing shrieks, distracted with anguish, 
cried out : " O Lakshmana, thou long-armed warrior, ever 
ministering to the satisfaction of thy superiors, dost thou not 
know that I am being carried away by a titan able to assume 
any shape at will ? O Raghava thou, who art willing to renounce 
life and happiness in the cause of duty, dost thou not see that 
I have been borne away by one of unsurpassed wickedness ? 
O Thou, the Scourge of Thine Enemies, art thou not accustomed 
to punish evildoers ? Why dost thou not subdue the arrogance 
of this wicked titan ? It is true that an evil deed does not bear 
fruit immediately, but time causes the grain to ripen. 
" For this outrage, bereft of thy senses by fate, thou shalt, 
O Ravana, meet with a terrible retribution, bringing about 
thine end. Alas ! The designs of Kaikeyi are crowned with 
success, since I, the virtuous consort of Rama am separated 
from that hero. I invoke Janasthana and the flowering Kami kara trees, so that they may tell Rama speedily that Sita has 
been borne away by Ravana ! I appeal to the Godaveri river, 
that re-echoes to the cry of cranes and swans, to inform Rama 
that Ravana has stolen Sita away ! Offering salutations to the 
forest Deities, I call upon them to tell my lord of mine abduc tion ! I beseech all creatures, whatever they may be, whether 
beast or bird or those that inhabit the forest, to make these 
tidings known to Rama and to tell him that his tender spouse, 
dearer to him than life, has been forcibly borne away by 
Ravana. Were death himself my ravisher, that mighty-armed 
one, hearing this report, would rescue me by his prowess ! " 
In the extremity of her grief, the large-eyed Sita, uttering 
this lament, observed the vulture Jatayu, perching on a tree. 
Thereupon beholding him, the beautiful Sita, borne away by 
Ravana, who was filled with carnal desire, cried out in piteous 
tones : — 
" O Noble jatayu, see how I am being ruthlessly carried off 
by the wicked King of the Titans, like a woman bereft of her 
protector. Thou wilt not be able to resist him, for this cruel 
and evil Ranger of the Night is powerful, arrogant and furnished 
with weapons. Nevertheless, O Bird, do thou bear the tidings 
of mine abduction to Rama and Lakshmana and tell them all, 
omitting nothing." 
104 
ARANYA KANDA 
CHAPTER 50 
Jatayu attacks Ravana 
Jatayu, who was fast asleep, awoke on hearing these words 
and beheld Ravana and the daughter of Videha. 
Thereupon, the King of Birds, with his sharp beak resembling 
the peak of a mountain, perching on the tree, spoke softly to 
Ravana, saying : — 
" O Dashagriva, I am conversant with the Puranas, firm in 
my vows, and follow the path of dharma. O Brother, it does 
not become thee to commit this infamy in my presence ! My 
name is Jatayu, the King of the Vultures ; she whom thou dost 
seek to bear away is the beautiful Sita, the faithful and illustrious 
consort of the Protector of the Worlds, that Lord of Men, 
Rama, the son of Dasaratha, who is equal to Varuna and 
Mahendra and ever engaged in the welfare of all beings. 
" How can a king, fixed in his duty, look upon another's 
wife ? O Thou of mighty prowess, it is for thee particularly 
to defend the consorts of kings, therefore control thy base 
inclination to insult the wife of another. A noble person will 
ever eschew that which may bring reproach on him, and 
protects another's wife as if she were his own. 
" O Delight of Poulastya, whether it concerns that which is 
expedient or agreeable, in the absence of the authority of the 
scriptures, men of honour follow the example of a king in 
matters of duty. A king represents duty, a king represents 
desire and is the supreme treasury of his subjects ; he is the 
root of good and evil. 
" O King of the Titans, thou art wicked and fickle by nature; 
how hast thou obtained a kingdom, like unto a sinner winning 
the celestial abode ? It is hard for an unruly and passionate 
man to change his nature ; noble counsels are not long remem bered by perverse persons. Since the mighty and virtuous 
Rama has never done a wrong in thy kingdom or capital, 
why dost thou seek to provoke him ? Is Rama of irreproach- 
105 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
able action to blame if he slew the wicked Khara in Janasthana 
on account of Shurpanakha ? Why dost thou seek to bear away 
the consort of that Lotd of Men ? Release Vaidehi this instant, 
lest, with his dread glance resembling a glowing brazier, he 
consume thee, as Indra reduced Vritra to ashes with his 
thunderbolt. 
" O Ravana, thou art unwittingly carrying a highly venomous 
serpent in thy robe ; without discerning it, thou art wearing 
the noose of death round thy neck. A man should only bear 
that weight which will not crush him and eat only that which 
does not give rise to sickness. Who will engage himself in 
an act which is neither praiseworthy, just, nor honourable, 
and which will cost him his life ? 
" O Ravana, I am sixty thousand years old and have ruled 
over the domain of mine ancestors with justice. I am exceed ingly aged, thou art youthful and furnished with a bow, armour 
and arrows, mounted on a car, yet thou shalt not escape 
without injury, if thou seekest to bear Vaidehi away. Thou 
shalt no more be able to carry her away by force in my presence, 
than it is possible to destroy the wisdom of the Veda by logic. 
" If thou art not afraid, O Ravana, then halt an instant and 
fight ! Thou shalt fall on the earth as Khara before thee ! 
Rama, clad in robes of bark, who more than once vanquished 
the Daityas and Danavas in the field, would soon have slain 
thee in combat. As for me, what can I do ? The two princes 
are far away and undoubtedly thou art fleeing in all haste in 
fear of them, Thou Wretch ! Yet while I still live, thou shalt 
not bear away the lovely Sita, the beloved consort of Rama, 
whose eyes resemble the petals of the lotus. Even at the 
risk of my life I shall render this service to the magnanimous 
Rama, as if to King Dasaratha himself. Stay ! Stay 1 O 
Dashagriva, reflect but for a moment. O Ravana, I shall 
hurl thee from thy great chariot like a ripe fruit from its stalk ! 
O Prowler of the Night, I challenge thee to fight to the last." 
ARANYA KANDA 
CHAPTER 5 I 
The Combat between Jatayu and Ravana 
While Jatayu, the King of Birds, was speaking thus, Ravana, that 
Indra among Men, wearing golden earrings, his eyes red with 
anger, fell upon him and a terrible struggle ensued in the sky, 
resembling clouds impelled by the force of the wind; in 
that conflict Jatayu, King of Vultures, and Ravana, the Lord 
of the Titans, resembled two vast winged mountains. 
Then Ravana began to shower innumerable steel-pointed 
shafts on the mighty King of the Vultures, but he, the chief 
of those whose wings are their chariot, received them unmoved 
and with his feet and sharp talons that foremost of birds inflicted 
countless wounds on the titan. Thereupon Dashagriva, filled 
with fury, anxious to destroy his adversary, taking out formidable 
shafts, equal to the God of Death, drew his bow up to his ear 
and pierced the vulture with those arrows, which, flying straight 
at their target, penetrated it with their steely points. 
Seeing the daughter of Janaka, her eyes bathed in tears, in 
the titan's car, Jatayu, disregarding those shafts, hurled himself 
at his opponent and, with his claws that valiant prince of the 
feathered tribe broke that bow decorated with pearls and 
gems and the arrows also. 
Thereupon Ravana, transported with anger, seized another bow 
and covered him with a hail of hundreds and thousands of arrows. 
Buried beneath those shafts, Jatayu resembled a bird in its 
nest, but flapping his wings, he broke through that cloud of 
arrows and with his sharp claws snapped that mighty bow ; 
with a stroke of his wings he shattered Ravana's blazing shield, 
that resembled Are, and brushed aside the flaming darts that 
encompassed him. 
Then Jatayu, in that conflict, slew the swift-coursing mules 
with demons' heads, harnessed with gold, and demolished 
the chariot of Ravana, furnished with a triple standard of 
bamboo staves, which was driven by thought alone, bright as 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
fire, its steps studded with precious gems. With a single 
movement of his wings, Jatayu struck down the canopy, like 
unto a full moon, with the chowries and the titans who wielded 
them. 
His bow shattered, bereft of his chariot, horses and charioteer, 
Ravana sprang to the ground, clasping Sita to his breast. 
Seeing Ravana descend, his car destroyed, all beings voiced 
their delight and praised the King of the Vultures again and 
again, paying obeisance to him. 
Ravana, however, perceiving that winged hero to be failing 
through exhaustion and age, greatly encouraged, rose high 
into the air, clasping the daughter of Janaka to him. Though 
without a bow, his other weapons being broken in combat, 
possessing his sword alone, he clasped Janaki passionately to 
his breast. Then the King of the Vultures darted towards 
him, barring his passage, and said to him : — 
'* O Insensate One, thou art carrying away the beloved 
consort of Rama, radiant as lightning ; it is to thy perdition 
that thou hast brought about her abduction. Like thirsty 
men drinking water, thou art swallowing poison, with thy 
friends, kinsfolk, ministers, army and people. Those who 
through want of discrimination fail to foresee the consequences 
of their acts soon perish, as thou too shalt meet thine end. 
Caught in the noose of death, whither wilt thou flee ? Thou 
art like unto the fish that swallows the hook as well as the bait. 
Assuredly those two invincible heroes, Offspring of the House 
of Raghu, will not brook the violation of their domicile. The 
deed that thou hast basely committed will be denounced by 
the world, as the path frequented by brigands is eschewed 
by honest people. If thou art not a coward, fight, O Ravana, 
or pause an instant and thou shalt lie dead on the earth, as 
did thy brother Khara. Truly thou art engaged in that which 
will prove thy destruction, as one on the brink of death com mits an impious deed. Those actions leading to evil are not 
undertaken even by the Lord of Creation, Swyambhu Himself." 
Uttering these harsh words, the valiant Jatayu swooped on 
the ten-headed demon and, seizing him in Ins claws, tore his 
flesh like the rider of a restive elephant. Inflicting deep 
wounds, he plunged his beak into his back and tore bis hair 
108 
ARANYA KANDA 
with his talons. Thus assailed by the Vulture King, the 
titan, trembling with rage, pressing Vaidehi to his left side, 
foaming with anger, struck Jatayu with the palm of his hand, 
whereupon the mighty vulture Jatayu, the Destroyer of his 
Foes, hurled himself on Dashagriva and with his beak tore off 
his ten left arms. His arms being severed, in an instant as 
many others sprang up again, like serpents issuing from an ant 
heap, spitting forth poison. 
Then, in his anger, the mighty Dashagriva released Sita in 
order to beat off the King of the Vultures with his fists and feet, 
and a mighty struggle arose between those two intrepid com batants, the Chief of the Titans and the Foremost of Birds, until 
Ravana, drawing his sword, cut off the wings and feet of Jatayu, 
piercing the side of that champion of Rama. The Ranger 
of the Skies having sundered the two wings of that King of 
Vultures, Jatayu fell to the earth, at the point of death, and 
seeing him on the ground, bathed in blood, Vaidehi, exceed ingly distressed, darted towards him, as to one of her own kin. 
Then the Lord of Lanka beheld that noble bird of exceed ing prowess, with his yellow breast and plumage resembling 
a dark cloud, lying on the earth, like an extinguished torch, 
whereupon the weeping Sita, daughter of Janaka, whose 
countenance was like unto the full moon, pressed that winged 
creature, victim of the wanton Ravana, to her breast. 
chapter 52 
Jatayu being slain, Ravana resumes his Flight 
Beholding that King of the Vultures struck down by Ravana, 
she whose face was as fair as the moon, stricken with grief, 
burst into lamentation, crying :— 
" Visions, omens, dreams and the cries of birds are the 
inevitable signs of good and evil fortune among men. O 
Kakutstha, because of me wild beasts and birds are fleeing 
away; dost thou not understand that a great calamity has befallen 
109 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
me ? 0 Rama, this bird, out of pity for me, sought to deliver 
me and now lies dying on the earth owing to mine evil fate ! 
O Kakutstha, O Lakshmana, hasten to mine aid ! " 
Thus did that lovely woman cry in her terror, as if they 
could hear her, and the Chief of the Titans, Ravana, continued 
to pursue her, who, far from her protectors, bearing a faded 
garland, was calling for aid. Clinging to the trees like a 
twining creeper, crying : " Save me ! Save me ! ", she ran 
hither and thither pursued by the King of the Titans. Bereft 
of Raghava, who was tar away in the forest, she was calling 
" Rama, Rama ! " when Ravana, resembling death itself, 
to his destruction seized her by the hair. 
At this outrage, the whole universe of animate and inanimate 
beings trembled and a profound darkness covered all. The 
wind grew still, the sun dim, and the Grandsire of the World, 
Swyambhu Himself, through his divine power seeing Sita 
overcome, exclaimed : " Our purpose is accomplished ! " 
Perceiving violent hands laid on Sita, the illustrious Sages 
inhabiting the Dandaka Forest, recognising that the destruction 
of Ravana was now assured, were filled with joy ! 
The Lord of the Titans, however, laying hold of Sita who 
was weeping and crying out : "Rama! Rama! O Lakshmana!" 
ascended with her into the air. 
Of the hue of molten gold, attired in a yellow sari, that 
daughter of a king resembled lightning athwart the clouds ; 
her silken robe, streaming in the wind, lent Ravana the sem blance of a blazing volcano, and the coppery and fragrant 
lotus leaves, falling from Vaidehi of incomparable beauty, 
covered him. Her yellow silken robe floating in the air 
resembled a cloud illumined by the setting sun, but her pure 
countenance, as she was being transported through space 
far from Rama, had lost its radiance, like a lotus detached from 
its stalk. 
Resembling the moon that rises from the heart of a dark 
cloud, Sita, her fair brows crowned with lovely locks, appeared 
like a lotus in flower that had lost its brilliance. 
With her sharp and brilliant teeth, glorious eyes, well formed nose, sweet mouth and ruby lips, she resembled the 
moon, lovely to look upon, and transported through the air 
no 
ARANYA KANDA 
in Ravana's lap, her face, bathed in tears, shone as faintly as 
does that orb during the daylight hours. 
The golden-hued Sita seen against the dark-bodied titan 
looked like the girth of gold encircling an elephant. Like 
unto the yellow lotus, the daughter of Janaka with her shining 
ornaments irradiated Ravana as lightning illumines a thunder cloud, and accompanied by the clashing of her jewels the 
King of the Demons appeared like unto a muttering cloud. 
As Sita was being borne away, the petals from her hair 
fell in a shower on the earth, and this rain of blossom, caused 
by Ravana's rapid flight, covered him also, as a wreath of stars 
encircles Mount Meru, and suddenly her anklet, encrusted 
with pearls, struck the earth like a flash of lightning. 
Like rosy twigs she covered the dark limbs of the King of 
the Titans with a radiance equal to the golden girth of an 
elephant and, as a mighty meteor illumines the heavens with 
its splendour, so was she borne through the air by the younger 
brother of Vaishravana. 
Her jewels, flashing like fire, fell tinkling on the earth, 
where they broke into pieces, like meteors falling from the 
Armament, and her chain of pearls, bright as the moon, fell 
from her breast, emitting a blaze of light, like the Ganges 
falling from heaven. 
The trees, sheltering a myriad birds, bufTetted by the 
following wind that swayed the topmost branches, seemed to 
whisper " Fear not ! " and the lakes, carpeted with faded 
lotuses, filled with fish and stricken aquatic creatures, appeared 
to be weeping for Maithili as for a friend. Rushing in wrath 
from all sides, lions, tigers and other beasts and birds followed 
Sita's shadow, and the mountains too, with their cataracts like 
faces bathed in tears, their crests like arms upraised, seemed 
to lament for Sita, as she was being borne away. Beholding 
Vaidehi carried through the air, the glorious sun, oppressed 
with sadness, lost its brilliance and became but a pale disc. 
" There is neither justice, equity, nor truth, nor sincerity, 
nor kindness, since the consort of Rama, the Princess of Videha, 
is being carried away by Ravana." Thus did the assembled 
beings lament, whilst the young of the wild creatures, forlorn 
and terrified, emitted plaintive cries. Lifting up their eyes, 
in 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
glassy with fear, again and again, the forest Deities, trembling 
in every limb, witnessed the anguish of Vaidebi, who was 
being borne away so cruelly and who was constantly looking 
towards the earth and crying in faint accents : " O Lakshmana, 
ORama". 
The guileless Vaidehi, her hair streaming behind her, her 
tilaka effaced, was borne away by Dashagriva to his own 
destruction, and Maithili with her beautiful teeth and gracious 
smile, bereft of her friends, not beholding Rama or Lakshmana, 
grew pale and felt herself wholly crushed under the weight 
of her despair. 
chapter 53 
Sit a censures Ravana 
Finding herself borne through space, Maithili, the daughter of 
Janaka, greatly alarmed and filled with distress, in an access 
of fear, her eyes red with tears and indignation, her voice 
broken by sobs, addressed that ferocious King of the Titans 
who was bearing her away, in plaintive tones, saying :-— , 
" O Base Wretch, art thou not ashamed of this act ? Knowing 
me to be alone, thou hast laid hands on me and carried me 
away. O Sinful Being, thou it was who, seeking to abduct me, 
didst in the form of a deer lure my lord away by the power of 
illusion. 
" The King of the Vultures, that friend of my father-in-law, 
who sought to defend me, lies slain ! Verily thou hast shown 
great courage, O Last of the Titans ! To thine eternal shame, 
thou didst not win me in fair fight but without disclosing thy 
name I1 Dost thou not blush to commit such an outrage? 
Wretch that thou art, to bear away a woman who is defenceless 
and the wife of another ! Thy dishonourable exploit will be 
proclaimed throughout the worlds. Cursed be thou, O 
Infamous Barbarian, who boastcth of thine heroism 1 Cursed 
be such valour and prowess, O Thou, the Obloquy of thy Race, 
1 It was traditional to make one's name known before entering into combat. 
112 
ARANYA KANDA 
cursed be thou in the world, for thy conduct ! How should 
any restrain thee who flcest so precipitately? Halt but for 
an instant and thy life is forfeit ! Shouldst thou come within 
the range of those two Kings of Men, thou wouldst not survive 
for a single moment even wert thou supported by an army ! 
As a bird is not able to bear the blazing forest fire, neither 
couldst thou withstand the least of their shafts ; therefore, 
for thine own good, release me instantly, O Ravana ! 
" Provoked by mine abduction, my lord with the aid of his 
brother will strive to destroy thee if thou dost not let me go. 
Thine evil intention, on account of which thou dost seek to 
bear me away, that vile purpose, will never find fulfilment; 
for even were I never again to see my lord, who is endowed 
with supreme wisdom and should fall a victim to an enemy, 
I should not survive long. 
" Thou dost disregard thine own good and resemblest one 
who, in his last hour, chooses what is fatal to him ; none who 
desires his end courts that which will save him. I see the 
noose of death about thy neck, since thou dost not tremble in 
this exigency, O Titan. Without doubt, thou shah see those 
golden trees, with leaves like sharp swords and the dreadful 
river Vaitarani flowing with blood and the terrible forest and 
Shamali tree, with its flowers of refined gold and its leaves of 
emerald, bristling with iron thorns.1 
" Having offered this affront to the high-souled Rama, thou 
shalt not survive the poison that thou hast swallowed, O Merciless 
One. Thou art caught fast in the noose of death ; whither 
wilt thou turn for refuge from my magnanimous lord? He 
who, in the twinkling of an eye, without his brother, destroyed 
fourteen thousand demons in combat, how should that hero, 
issue of the House of Raghu, skilled in the use of every weapon, 
full of valour, not pierce thee with his pointed shafts, thou 
who hast carried away his beloved spouse?" 
With these defiant words and others uttered in plaintive tones, 
Vaidehi, borne away in Ravana's arms, addressed him, though 
filled with grief and fear. Yet, despite her distress and lamenta tions, Ravana continued on his way, bearing that sweet and gentle 
princess, still struggling to break free. 
1 la the region of Hell. 
"3 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 54 
Ravana reaches Lanka with Sita 
Borne away by Ravana, Vaidehi, seeing none who would 
defend her, suddenly observed five powerful monkeys standing 
on the summit of a mountain. 
Thereupon that large-eyed princess of surpassing charms, 
let fall among them her silken mantle, bright as gold and her 
rich jewels. Reflecting ( May they convey the tidings to Rama *, 
the beautiful Sita dropped her cloak and ornaments in their 
midst. 
In his anxiety the red-eyed Dashagriva did not observe this 
proceeding but these excellent monkeys beheld the large-eyed 
Sita, who did not move her eyelids as she was crying out.1 
Then that Lord of the Titans, passing beyond the Pampa lake, 
his face turned towards Lanka, continued on his way, clasping 
the wailing Maithili. Although experiencing a transport of 
joy, Ravana in truth was carrying his own destruction in his 
arms, like a sharp-toothed and poisonous serpent. 
Coursing through the air, he left behind forest, rivers, 
mountains and lakes and speeding on like an arrow shot from, 
a bow he passed over that sanctuary of whales and crocodiles, 
the indestructible abode of Varuna, the refuge of rivers, the 
ocean. Beholding Sita borne away, the waters became con vulsed and the great serpents and fish were startled. 
Then the voices of the Charanas and Siddhas could be 
heard in the sky, saying : " The end of Dashagriva is at 
hand I ". Ravana however, who symbolised death itself, bear ing the struggling Sita in his lap, entered the city of Lanka. 
Reaching that capital with its broad and spacious highways, 
he entered the palace and penetrated into the inner appartments. 
It was there that the dark-browed Sita, a prey to grief and 
despair, was set down by Ravana in his own domain, as Maya 
sheds his illusion. 
1 Thus not betraying her intention to Ravana. 
114 
ARANYA KANDA 
Then Ravana addressed those demons of dreadful aspect, 
saying : — 
" Let none look on Sita without mine authority ! It is my 
will that she have pearls, rubies, robes and ornaments to the 
extent of her desire ! Whoever speaks harshly to her, either 
knowingly or unknowingly, will forfeit his life ! " 
Having spoken thus to the titan women, Ravana left the 
inner apartment and began to reflect on what more should 
now be done. 
Observing eight valiant, flesh-eating titans, that exceedingly 
powerful One, blinded by the boon he had received, after 
extolling their strength and heroism, said to them : — 
" Equipped with every kind of weapon, betake yourselves 
with all speed to Janasthana, where Khara formerly dwelt and, 
summoning up your courage, banishing all fear, establish 
yourselves in that place, which is now a desert on account of 
the massacre of the titans. A great and mighty army was 
entrenched in Janasthana, which, with Khara and Dushana, 
was destroyed in combat with Rama. Since that time, an 
inordinate rage which I am unable to control has taken possession 
of me, precluding all rest. I wish to avenge myself on my 
sworn enemy, nor shall I sleep till I have slain him in fight. 
In the hour that I bring about the death of the slayer of Khara 
and Dushana, I shall rejoice, as a beggar on the acquisition of 
wealth. 
" Established in Janasthana, keep me scrupulously informed 
concerning Rama and his movements. Without respite, let 
the Rangers of the Night take action and constantly strive to 
bring about Rama's end. Being acquainted with your valour, 
which I have often witnessed in the field, I have chosen you 
to repair to Janasthana." 
Hearing these flattering and significant words of Ravana's, 
those titans, bowing down to him, left Lanka in a body and 
took the direction of Janasthana in all haste, having first made 
themselves invisible. 
But Ravana, having secured Mithila's daughter and brought 
her to the palace, though he had thus incurred the hostility 
of Rama, gave himself up to transports of senseless joy. 
ir5 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 55 
Ravana implores Sita to become his Consort 
Having issued commands to those eight titans, renowned for 
their prowess, Ravana, whose perception was clouded, con sidered that he had prepared himself for every eventuality. 
Brooding on Vaidehi, sorely pierced by the shafts of the 
God of Love, he hastened to his sumptuous apartments, 
inflamed with desire for her presence. Entering there, Ravana, 
the King of the Titans, observed Sita overcome with grief, 
surrounded by titan women, like a ship foundering in the sea 
at the mercy of a storm or a gazelle separated from the herd 
beset by hounds. 
Then Ravana approaching that princess, whose head was 
bowed and who was disconsolate, compelled her to view that 
mansion resembling the abode of the Gods, containing many 
storeys and spacious apartments, inhabited by innumerable 
women and enriched by countless gems, whilst flocks of birds 
filled it with their carolling. Graceful pillars of gold, ivory, 
crystal and silver, encrusted with emeralds and diamonds 
could be seen and celestial gongs resounded there. 
Ravana, in company with Sita, ascended the magnificent 
golden stairway, ornamented with burnished gold. Those 
lofty buildings possessed excellent windows of gold and ivory 
covered with golden trellises, and their marble floors were 
inlaid with precious stones that shed their lustre everywhere. 
Then Dashagriva showed Maithili the fountains and pools 
covered with lotuses and every kind of flower ; all this did 
he bring to the notice of Sita who was overcome with grief ; 
and after directing Vaidehi's attention to the splendours of the 
palace, that perverse wretch, with the intention of seducing her, 
said: 
" O Sita, apart from the aged and the children, ten thousand 
titans, rangers of the night, all of whom are famed for their 
exploits, acknowledge me as their lord, and each among them 
116 
ARANYA KANDA 
has placed a thousand loyal servants at my disposal. This 
entire state, as also my life, is thine, O Large-eyed Lady. 
Thou art dearer to me than life itself! O Sita, become the 
queen of those numerous excellent women who are my wives. 
O Beloved, be my consort, it is to thine advantage. What 
boots it to consider aught else, do thou give my proposal thy 
consideration ; it behoves thee to look favourably on me, who 
am burning with desire. 
" Surrounded by the ocean, this city of Lanka, extending 
for a hundred yojanas, can never be taken by storm, even by 
the Gods themselves with Indra at their head. Among the 
Celestials, Yakshas, Gandharvas and Nagas, I can see none 
in all the worlds equal to me in prowess. Deprived of his 
kingdom, without possessions, dedicated to ascetic practices, 
travelling on foot, what canst thou hope from Rama, a mere 
man without resources ? 
" O Sita, I am a consort worthy of thee, do thou accept me ; 
youth soon passes, O Darling ; enjoy these delights with me. 
O Lady of charming mien, do not think of seeing Raghava 
again. How could he come hither even in thought? Who 
can fetter the impetuous wind in the sky or seize the pure 
flame of a brazier ? None in the Three Worlds may snatch 
thee from mine arms. Do thou rule over this vast empire of 
Lanka and all beings, animate and inanimate ; even I and the 
Gods shall be thy servants. Laving thyself in the crystal waters, 
be happy and live in delight. Thy former evil karma has been 
expiated by the time passed by thee in the forest. It is here 
that thou wilt be able to pluck the fruit of thy good deeds. 
In my company, O Maithili, enjoy these garlands with their 
divine fragrance and these magnificent ornaments. With me 
do thou disport thyself in the aerial chariot Fuskpaka, bright 
as the sun, that was once Vaishravana's, which I won by my 
prowess in combat, that vast and beautiful car, swift as thought. 
" Thy countenance, flawless and lovely to look upon, pure 
as a lotus, is wan on account of sorrow and has lost its radiance, 
O Lady of lovely limbs and gracious features." 
Whilst he was speaking, the beautiful Sita covered her face 
that sparkled like the moon with the hem of her robe and 
allowed her tears to flow. 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Thereat the sinful Ravana, that Ranger of the Night, 
addressed Sita who was sunk in thought and forlorn, her 
cheeks pale on account of grief, saying : — 
" O Vaidehi, do not fear to contravene dharma ; the cere mony that shall consecrate our union is sanctioned by the 
Veda ! I press thy tender feet with my heads ; grant my prayer 
speedily ! I am thy slave and ever obedient to thee ! May 
these words, inspired by the torments of love, not prove fruit less ; never before has Ravana bowed his head before a woman." 
Having spoken thus to Maithili, the daughter of Janaka, 
Dashagriva under the sway of destiny, thought : " She is 
minel " 
CHAPTER 56 
Sita is guarded by the Titan Women 
Hearing these words, Vaidehi, though still distressed, ceased 
to tremble and placed a blade of grass between herself and 
Ravana, saying : — 
" King Dasaratha, the indestructible rampart of justice, 
whose piety brought him renown, had a son, Raghava. 
Famed in the Three Worlds, that virtuous one, possessed of 
powerful arms and large eyes, is my God and my lord. It 
is he, that hero, born in the House of Ikshwaku, illustrious, 
possessing shoulders like unto a lion's, who, with his brother 
Lakshmana will rob thee of thy life ! 
" Hadst thou laid violent hands on me in his presence, he 
would have compelled thee to refrain and would have slain 
thee in single combat, even as he slew Rhara himself in 
Janasthana. Those titans of grim visage, whom thou dost 
extol to me, valiant though they be, would be deprived of their 
power in Raghava's presence, as serpents yield up their poison 
before Suparna. Those golden shafts, loosed from the string 
of Rama's bow, would pierce their bodies, as the Ganges 
bears away her banks ! Though thou mayest not be slain by 
118 
ARANYA KANDA 
Asuras or Gods, yet now that thou hast incurred the fury of 
Raghava, thou wilt not escape alive. 
" Thou hast but a short time to live ! Raghava will compass 
thine end ! That life which thou deemest impossible to lose 
is as a beast's bound to the sacrificial stake ! If Rama lets fall 
on thee his glance inflamed with ire, thou wilt instantly be 
consumed, O Titan, as Mamatha by Rudra ! He, who is able 
to bring down the moon from the skies and destroy it or dry 
up the ocean, is assuredly able to deliver Sita. Thy life, thy 
prosperity, thy being and faculties are forfeit ; Lanka, bereft 
of its inhabitants, will be left desolate through thy fault. Nay, 
this outrage will bring thee nought but misfortune, O Thou 
who in the absence of my lord didst bear me away by force, 
never more wilt thou know felicity ! 
" My illustrious lord, accompanied by his brother, depend ing on his own energy, does not fear to live in the Dandaka 
Forest. Thy prowess, thy strength, thine arrogance and thy 
presumption, will all be wiped out under the rain of his shafts 
in battle. When the hour, appointed by destiny for the 
destruction of beings, is at hand, they become mad under its 
sway. Mine abduction presages thine end and that of the 
titans and of those dwelling in the inner apartments. As an 
untouchable may not approach the sacred altar, furnished with 
ladles and vessels of worship at the time of sacrifice, so the 
legitimate spouse of one fixed in virtue, faithful to his vows, 
may not be approached by a sinner such as thou, O Last of 
the Titans ! 
" How should a royal swan, sporting amidst the tufts of 
lotuses with her mate, concern herself with a cormorant on the 
bank ? Bind or destroy this insentient body1, I have neither 
desire to preserve it nor my life, O Titan, for I will never 
submit to dishonour." 
After speaking thus in her wrath, causing the blood to freeze, 
Vaidehi became silent, and Ravana answered her in menacing 
tones, saying : " Reflect well, O Lovely Princess ; if thou 
dost not yield to me within the period of twelve months, my 
cooks shall cut thee to pieces for my morning repast." 
1 Implyingthat the bodyitself is inanimate when not energised by Conscious ness. 
119 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Having spoken thus, Ravana, the Challenger of His Foes, 
exceedingly wroth, addressed those female titans in these 
words : — 
" Ye terrible demons of ferocious aspect, who subsist on 
flesh and blood, do ye instantly crush the pride of this woman! " 
When he had said this, those monsters of fearful aspect, joining 
hands, surrounded Maithili, and Ravana commanded those 
women, formidable to look upon, who walking struck the earth 
with such force that it shook, saying : — 
" Do yc take Maithili to the centre of the Ashoka grove, and 
there, encircling her mount guard over her secretly, and some times by menaces and at others by soft speech seek in every 
way to break her will, as one would a female elephant." 
Thus commanded by Ravana, those titan woman, taking 
hold of Maithili, dragged her to the Ashoka grove which was 
planted with trees covered with flowers of every kind and 
many fruits, able to satisfy every desire, where birds disported 
themselves in love. 
And, as a gazelle in the midst of tigresses, Sita, the daughter 
of Janaka, her limbs giving way under her despair, fell under 
the sway of those titans. 
Like a timid antelope taken in a snare, Maithili, the daughter 
of Janaka, overwhelmed with grief and fear, could find no 
relief. And threatened by those terrible monsters, the Princess 
of Mithila, unable to rest, remembering her lord and beloved 
brother-in-law, under the weight of terror and sorrow, swooned 
away. 
CHAPTER 57 
Rama sees Terrible Portents 
Having slain Maricha, that titan able to change his shape at 
will who wandered about in the form of a deer, Rama took 
bis way back to the hermitage with all speed, eager to behold 
Maithili and, as he hastened on, jackals began to howl mourn fully behind him. Hearing those dismal sounds, causing him 
ARANYA KANDA 
to tremble, Rama, seized with alarm, reflected : " Is Vaidehi 
safe and well or has she become a prey to the titans ? The 
cry raised by Marietta in the guise of a deer, imitating my 
voice, if heard by Lakshmana, may cause htm to leave Sita 
in order to come to mine aid ! It may be that the titans have 
resolved to slay Sita and for this reason Maricha, in the form 
of a gazelle, lured me away ! Having brought me a great 
distance, that titan fell a victim to my shafts and feigning my 
voice, cried out : * O Lakshmana, I am slain ! * Is all well 
with them, deprived of my presence in the forest ? On account 
of Janasthana, I have rendered myself hateful to the titans, 
and many and dreadful are the portents I now see around me." 
Reflecting thus on hearing the jackals' cries, Rama hurriedly 
made his way towards the hermitage, pondering on the means 
adopted by the titan in assuming the form of a deer to lure 
him far away from his dear ones. 
Directing his steps towards Janasthana, his heart filled with 
apprehension, he observed the birds and beasts passing to his 
left, emitting fearful cries, and witnessing these dreadful 
signs Raghava beheld Lakshmana approaching, pale of mien. 
Already a prey to anxiety, Rama became even more distressed 
on seeing his brother thus cast down. 
Observing that he had left Sita alone in the solitary wood 
frequented by titans, taking Lakshmana by the left hand, he 
spoke to him in a gentle voice, in sad and reproachful tones, 
saying : — 
" Ah ! Lakshmana, thou hast done wrong to come 
hither, leaving Sita unprotected. O My Friend, how can this 
prove auspicious ? Assuredly the daughter of Janaka has been 
slain or even devoured by the titans who range the woods ! 
Since so many evil portents have appeared to me, O Lakshmana, 
I question whether we shall find Sita, the daughter of Janaka, 
alive, O Lion among Men ! Since this multitude of beasts and 
jackals are emitting fearful cries and the birds also, as they 
fly towards the south, I fear that all is not well with that king's 
daughter, O Hero of great prowess ! 
" That titan, wearing the form of a deer, deceived me and 
drew me far from the hermitage. Having slain him with 
difficulty., at the point of death, he revealed himself to me in 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
his true form. My heart is heavy and bereft of all delight, 
and my left eye throbs. Undoubtedly, O Lakshmana, Sita 
is no longer there and has either been carried away or is dead 
or lost in the forest." 
CHAPTER 58 
Rama's Lament 
Seeing Lakshmana, cast down and dejected, approaching 
without Vaidehi, the virtuous son of Dasaratha enquired of 
him, saying : — 
" O Lakshmana, where is Vaidehi, who followed me to the 
Dandaka Forest and whom thou hast left alone to come hither? 
Where is that one of graceful form, the companion of my 
misfortune when I was banished from my kingdom and, 
dispirited, roamed the Dandaka Forest ; where is Sita, without 
whom I cannot live for an instant, my life's companion, who 
resembled a daughter of the Gods ? 
" O Hero, separated from that daughter of Janaka, whose 
skin was like gold, I have neither a desire for the sovereignty 
of the Gods or the earth. O Lakshmana, Sita is dearer to me 
than life itself. O Saumitri, has my banishment been rendered 
void ? If, on account of Sita, I should die and thou return 
to the city alone, will it not prove the consummation of Kaikeyi's 
desires and she find felicity ? Will not Kaushalya, her son 
dead, become the abject slave of Kaikeyi when, having accom plished her design, she rules the dominion with her son? 
If Vaidehi still lives, I will return to the hermitage, but if my 
virtuous spouse be dead, I shall yield up my life, O Lakshmana! 
If on returning to the ashrama the daughter of Videha, whose 
words were ever preceded by a smile, does not speak to me, 
I shall renounce my life. 
" Tell me, O Lakshmana, if Vaidehi is living or no, or whether 
in consequence of thy leaving her that unfortunate creature 
has been devoured by the titans. Alas ! The wretched Sita, 
so tender and fragile, never having experienced unhappiness, 
ARANYA KANDA 
will be wholly desolate in mine absence. Did that titan, full 
of cunning and craft, crying out * O Lakshmana ', inspire thee 
with fear ? I surmise that Vaidehi, hearing that cry for help 
uttered in a voice resembling mine, besought thee to find out 
what had become of me and thou didst come hither with all 
speed. Thou hast done an irretrievable wrong in abandoning 
Sita in the forest, thus affording those cruel and ruthless titans 
an opportunity for avenging themselves. Those flesh-eating 
demons are aggrieved on account of Khara's death and now, 
without doubt, have slain Sita. Alas ! I am wholly submerged 
in an ocean of sorrow, O Destroyer of thy Foes ! What shall 
I do now ; I tremble before that which awaits me ! " 
Thus immersed in the thought of Sita, that paragon among 
women, Raghava hastened towards Janasthana in company 
with Lakshmana. 
Heaping reproaches on his younger brother, who was over whelmed with distress, tormented by hunger, fatigue and 
thirst, Rama, sighing heavily, his countenance pale, a prey to 
despair, entered his hermitage and found it deserted. 
Returning to the ashrama, that hero ran hither and thither 
where Sita was wont to disport herself and, recollecting those 
haunts where she used to roam, he became distracted, his 
hair standing on end. 
CHAPTER 59 
Rama reproaches Lakshmana 
Issuing from the hermitage, Rama, the Delight of the House 
of Raghu, continued to address Lakshmana in a faint voice, 
saying : — 
" Having confided Maithili to thy care during mine absence 
in the forest, why didst thou abandon her ? Seeing thee appear 
alone, having left Maithili unprotected, my spirit was troubled, 
apprehending grave danger. O Lakshmana, watching thee 
approach from a distance unaccompanied by Sita, my left eye 
and arm twitched and my heart throbbed." 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
At these words, the son of Sumitra, who bore the marks of 
royalty, was seized with distress and said to the stricken Rama: — 
" Nay, it was not of myself that I came hither, nor of mine 
own inclination that I left Sita and set out to meet thee, but 
I was urged thereto by her entreaties to come to thine aid. 
" The cry, ' O Lakshmana, save me ! * as if uttered by her 
lord, broke on Maithili's ears and she, hearing this despairing 
call, from affection for thee, weeping and filled with terror, 
said unto me : * Go ! Go ! *. While she thus continued to 
urge me, repeating * Go ', I spoke to her, seeking to reassure 
her, saying : ' I know of no titan who can excite Rama's fear ; 
it is not he, but another who calls, O Sita. How should that 
illustrious warrior, the inspirer of awe in the Gods themselves, 
utter so base and shameful a word as * save me * ? Who has 
imitated the voice of my brother and pronounced these cowardly 
words and for what motive? Assuredly it is a demon who, 
in his extremity, has uttered the cry, * Help ! '. O Lovely One, 
it does not become thee to tremble like a low-born woman ! 
Take courage, calm thyself and banish thine anxiety. There 
is none born, nor yet to be born in the Three Worlds, who is 
able to triumph over Raghava in the field in open fight. He is 
incapable of being defeated in combat, even by the Gods 
with Indra at their head.' 
" Thus addressed by me, Vaidehi, distracted and shedding 
tears, uttered these cruel words : — 
" ' O Lakshmana, in thine extreme perversity thou seekest 
to unite thyself with me on the death of thy brother but thou 
shalt never possess me ! It is on Bharata's instigation that 
thou hast accompanied Rama, since, despite his despairing 
cry, thou dost not go to his aid. Concealing thy true purpose, 
thou hast treacherously followed Rama for my sake and for 
this reason dost refuse to assist him.' 
" Hearing Vaidehi's words, I left the hermitage, my lips 
trembling, mine eyes inflamed with wrath." 
When Saumitri had spoken thus, Rama, who was distracted 
with anxiety, said to him : " O Friend, thou hast done a 
great wrong by coming hither without Sita. Thou knowest 
well that 1 am able to defend myself against the titans, yet on 
account of a hasty word thou didst abandon Vaidehi. 
1*4 
ARANYA KANDA 
" I am not pleased that thou didst leave her nor that thou 
hast come here on account of the reproaches of an indignant 
woman. Submitting to Sita and giving way to the impulse of 
anger has caused thee to contravene the spiritual law and 
disobey my command. 
" That titan who assumed the form of a deer in order to 
lure me from the hermitage now lies stricken by mine arrows. 
Stretching my bow, I placed an arrow on it and loosed it, as 
it were in sport, laying him low. 
" Discarding his deer's form and assuming the shape of a 
titan adorned with bracelets, he emitted cries of agony ; there after feigning my voice, in accents capable of being heard afar 
off, he called out, and on hearing that sinister cry thou didst 
abandon Maithili and came hither." 
chapter 60 
The Search for Sita 
As Rama hastened on, his left eye began to twitch ; he stumbled 
and was seized with a fit of trembling. Observing these in auspicious signs, he enquired repeatedly of Lakshmana : — 
" Can all be well with Sita ? " 
Eager to see her again, he quickened his pace and hastened 
on, but when he reached the hermitage, he found it deserted 
and, filled with apprehension, began to run hither and thither, 
searching everywhere. To that descendant of Kaghu, his 
thatched hut, without Sita, appeared like a lake bereft of lotuses, 
shorn of its beauty at the end of summer. 
Seeing the deserted hermitage, with its trees that seemed to 
be weeping, its flowers faded, the deer and the birds melancholy, 
bereft of charm, wholly desolate, the forest Deities having 
forsaken it, the mats and deer-skins lying here and there, the 
grassy seats withered and trampled upon, Rama began to 
weep and cry out : — 
125 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
" Hath that timid one been carried away or killed or devoured 
or is she drowned or has she hidden herself in the forest ? 
Perchance she has not yet returned from gathering fruit and 
flowers or she has gone to bring back water from the pools 
or the river ? " 
Faint with seeking, without finding any trace of his beloved 
in the forest, running from tree to tree, scaling the hills, search ing by river and stream, lamenting the while and overcome 
with grief, he appeared like one struggling in a morass ! 
" O Kedumbra Tree ", he cried, " hast thou not seen my 
dear one, who cherished thee ? If thou knowest aught, then 
tell me where the lovely Sita can be found ? O Bilwa Tree ! 
Say hast thou seen her, who wears a silken robe, who is as 
fair as the young green shoots and whose breasts resemble 
thy fruit ? Or thou, O Arjuna Tree ! Give me tidings of the 
one who loved thee, that daughter of Janaka; dost that frail 
creature still live ? This Kadubha Tree knoweth for certain 
of Maithili, whose thighs resemble its fruit, and here stands the 
beautiful Vanaspati enveloped in flowering creepers, buds and 
leaves, in whose shade the bees hum, undoubtedly thou art 
the crown of trees ! Surely this Tilaka who loved Sita knows 
where she is now I O Ashoka Tree, dispeller of grief, prove 
the truth of thy name and allay the pain pressing on my heart 
by disclosing my loved one to me without delay. O Tala Tree, 
have pity on me and if thou hast seen that fair damsel, whose 
breasts resemble thy ripe fruit, do thou tell me ! O Jambu 
Tree, if thou hast seen my dear love, whose radiance resembles 
the Jambunada, then speak without fear, and thou, the first of 
the Karnikara trees, whose flowers are of surpassing loveliness, 
O Gentle One, say, hast thou seen my Beloved ? ** 
Thus did the illustrious Rama question every tree, Cuta, 
Nipa, giant Sala, Panasa, Kuravasa, also Vakula, Punnaga, 
Candana and Ketaka trees, running hither and thither in the 
forest like one demented. 
Thereafter he addressed the beasts, saying : " O Deer, do 
ye not know where Maithili is to be found, whose eyes resembled 
a gazelle's, who with her doe-like glances was followed by the 
fawns she had tamed ? O Elephant, methinks thou dost know 
her, whose thighs resembled thy trunk : pray tell me, hast 
126 
ARANYA KANDA 
thou seen her ? 0 Tiger, if thou hast seen my gentle spouse, 
whose countenance resembled the moon in radiance, then tell 
me fearlessly. 
" Why art thou hiding, O My Beloved ? I see thee, O Lotus eyed One ! Do not conceal thyself amidst the trees without 
replying ! Stay ! Stay ! O Princess of lovely Limbs, hast 
thou no pity for me? Why dost thou mock me? It is not 
thy nature to yield thyself to this folly, O Lady of Fair Com plexion, it is vain for thee to fly me, thy yellow sari renders 
thee easily distinguishable, I have seen thee ! Stay, if thou 
hast any love for me ! Alas ! It is not she — my Sita of gracious 
smiles ! Without doubt, she has perished since my grief 
leaves her unmoved ! 
" Assuredly that youthful woman has been devoured in 
mine absence ; Sita, with her lovely countenance, exquisite 
teeth and lips, shapely nose and beautiful earrings, whose skin 
resembles the winter jasmine, has perished, and her beauty is 
extinguished, as the full moon under eclipse. The slender 
neck of my well-beloved, of the hue of sandal, adorned with 
a necklace, has been devoured, like that of one poor and 
helpless, possessing neither kith nor kin. 
" O Mighty-armed One, dost thou not see my loved one 
anywhere ? O Where hast thou gone, O Sita, O My Lovely 
One?" 
Thus did Rama lament, and calling, ran from grove to grove, 
sometimes turning like a whirlwind, sometimes appearing like 
one who has lost his wits. Intent on finding his love, ranging 
the forest, scaling the mountain, exploring the rivers and 
waterfalls, he sped through the woodlands without rest. 
Searching on every side without pause, seeking Maithili 
throughout the forest, hoping to find his Beloved, he became 
utterly exhausted. 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 6 I 
Rama's Plaint 
Seeing the hermitage and the hut deserted, with the grassy 
seats strewn here and there and not finding Vaidehi anywhere, 
Rama, the son of Dararatha, lifting up his beautiful arms, 
uttered these sorrowful words : — 
" O Lakshmana, where is Vaidehi, where has she gone ? 
O Saumitri, who has carried away or devoured my dearest 
one ? O Sita, if thou hast concealed thyself behind a tree and 
art mocking me, then bring this jest to an end ; thou hast 
enjoyed my distress long enough ! O Darling, the young 
gazelles with whom thou didst play, languish in thine absence, 
their eyes filled with tears. Without Sita I cannot live, O 
Lakshmana, I am overwhelmed with grief on account of her 
abduction. To-day I shall rejoin that great monarch, my sire, 
in the other world, who will reproach me, saying : * How 
comes it that thou, having left me in order to redeem my 
vow, art come hither before the appointed time ? O Slave of 
thy desires, thou art bereft of honour and loyalty, woe unto 
thee!* 
" Without doubt, thus will my father address me in the 
other region ! O Cruel One ! distracted as I am and over whelmed with sorrow, thou hast deserted me, as a fair name 
parts company with a swindler ! O Lovely Princess, do not 
leave me ! O Slender-waisted Lady, in the abyss in which 
thou hast plunged me, I shall yield up my life ! " 
Thus did Rama lament, desiring to behold Sita once more, 
but the unfortunate Raghava could not see the daughter of 
Janaka anywhere. Sunk in misery on account of Sita, he 
resembled a mighty elephant trapped in marshy ground in 
which it has set foot. 
Then Lakshmana in his ardent desire to console him said: — 
" O Hero, O Mine of Wisdom, do not grieve ! Let us 
unitedly put forth our endeavours. This hill is famed for its 
many caves, and Maitbili, who, enamoured of the woods 
often wandered in these thickets, has doubtless ventured into 
128 
AJRANYA KANDA 
the deep forest or visited the lake covered with lotuses in bloom 
or she has gone to the river filled with fish and frequented by 
birds of beautiful plumage. Perchance she has hidden herself 
in the gorge to frighten us and to see if we will search her out. 
O Lion among Men, let us seek her without delay ! O Fortunate 
Prince, if thou deemest her to be somewhere in the forest, we 
will leave no quarter unexplored ; do not grieve, O Kakutstha!" 
These words of Lakshmana, inspired by fraternal affection, 
comforted Rama, who with Saumitri began to search for Sita 
once more with a tranquil heart. But ranging the woods, 
hills, rivers and lakes on every side, searching the plateaus, 
caves and summits of the mountain, those two sons of Dasaratha 
could not find Sita anywhere, and having sought her in every 
part of that mountain Rama said to Lakshmana : — 
" I see no trace of the lovely Vaidehi on this mountain, O 
Saumitri ! " 
Then Lakshmana in great distress addressed his brother, 
who was endowed with flaming energy, saying : — " It is by 
ranging the Dandaka Forest that thou wilt be re-united with 
Maithili, the daughter of Janaka, O Sagacious One, as Vishnu 
covered the earth on subduing Bali." 
Being thus addressed by the valiant Lakshmana, Raghava, 
whose heart was heavy with sorrow, answered in piteous 
accents, saying : — 
" The whole forest has been searched with care by us and 
the lakes where the lotus blooms and this mountain with its 
many caves and waterfalls also, O Prudent Prince, yet no trace of 
Vaidehi who is dearer to me than my life's breath can I find." 
Thus mourning, Rama, overcome by anxiety, his heart 
contracted with grief, in an excess of anguish, swooned away. 
Trembling in every limb, his mind bewildered, stunned and 
broken, that unhappy prince heaving deep and burning sighs, in 
a voice strangled with sobs, cried out : " O Sita, O My Beloved ! " 
Thereupon Lakshmana, distracted with anxiety, sought to 
console his dear brother by every means, standing before him 
with joined palms. 
But Rama gave no heed to the words that fell from 
Lakshmana's lips and, not beholding his dear Sita, continued 
to call upon her again and again. 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 62 
His Despair 
In the absence of Sita, the lotus-eyed, righteous and mighty 
Rama, his mind distraught with suffering, tortured by love for 
her, though unable to see her, with bitter sighs, reproached her 
as if she were present, saying : — 
" O Thou, whose youthful flowering is more graceful than 
the Ashoka branches, do not conceal thyself and increase my 
pain ! O Darling ! Thy thighs resemble the plaintain boughs 
which conceal thee, yet, O Goddess, thou canst not hide from 
me ! Laughing, thou hast taken refuge in the Karnikara grove, 
but enough of this jesting which is torturing me ! It is not 
fitting to sport thus in a hermitage, though I know laughter 
to be natural to thee, O Darling ! Return, O Large-eyed 
Damsel, thy hut is desolate ! 
'* Alas ! It is certain that those titans have devoured my 
Sita or borne her away and it is for this reason that she does 
not appear ; she would never mock me thus in my sorrow, 
O Lakshmana ! 
" O Saumitri, observe these deer from whose eyes the tears 
fall and who seem to say that Sita has been devoured by those 
Rangers of the Night. O Noble Lady, where hast thou gone ? 
O My Chaste One, my Lovely One ! Alas ! The desires of 
Kaikeyi are fulfilled to-day ! I went into exile with Sita and 
shall now return alone. How shall I enter the palace of the 
queens bereft of her presence ? Will not the people say : 
* He is a heartless wretch ! * 
" By the loss of Sita, I shall bear the stigma of cowardice 
and when my exile is over, Janaka, the King of Mithila, will 
enquire of me as to our welfare. How shall I answer him ? 
The Sovereign of Videha, seeing me return without Sita, will 
be overwhelmed with grief on account of her death and become 
a prey to madness ! 
130 
ARANYA KANDA 
" No, I will never return to Ayodhya ruled over by Bharata ; 
heaven itself would prove a desert without Sita. Do thou 
leave me in the forest and return to the opulent city of Ayodhya. 
As for me, I cannot live anywhere without Sita. Embracing 
Bharata tenderly, say to him in my name : * It is Rama's 
command that thou rule the earth.* Making obeisance to our 
mothers, Kaikeyi, Sumitra and Kaushalya, with due respect, 
protect them with all thy might, taking counsel of the wise. 
O Destroyer of Thy Foes, it is for thee to recount to them the 
death of Sita and mine own, in every detail." 
Thus did Raghava lament, while ranging the forest full of 
distress, far from Sita of lovely locks, whilst Lakshmana, his 
features blanched with terror, felt himself about to lose his 
reason in the excess of his grief. 
CHAPTER 63 
He continues to lament 
That son of a king, stricken with sorrow and a prey to anxiety, 
separated from his dear one, having caused his brother distress, 
fell into deeper and deeper despondency. Sunk in an abyss 
of grief, Rama with burning sighs and deep groans addressed 
Lakshmana, who was overwhelmed with anxiety, in words 
inspired by his own affliction, saying : — 
" There is none in the world I deem more wretched than I ; 
misfortune after misfortune follow each other in uninterrupted 
succession ; it is breaking my heart. Surely, formerly I 
either designed or executed innumerable evil acts and now 
their fruit has matured and greater and greater calamities 
beset me ! The loss of my kingdom, separation from my 
relatives, the parting from my mother, the remembrance of 
these things adds to the sum of mine unhappiness. Yet 
those griefs were forgotten as also the privations of mine 
exile in the forest, but now the disappearance of Sita re- 
131 k 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
awakens their memory as an almost extinct brazier suddenly 
bursts into flame. 
" My youthful and timid spouse has been carried away 
through the sky by a titan, emitting heart-rending cries un ceasingly in her terror, she who formerly was wont to converse 
so sweetly. Assuredly the breast of my Beloved, sprinkled 
with saffron of great price, is now soiled with blood and dust, 
yet I still live ! Sita, whose speech was gentle, clear and sweet, 
whose beauty was enhanced by her curly locks, has grown pale, 
having fallen a prey to the titans and she has lost her radiance, 
as the moon in the mouth of Rahu. The neck of my beloved 
and faithful consort, decorated with a string of pearls, may 
even now have been severed by the titans in some deserted 
place, where they are drinking her blood. Deprived of my 
presence, surrounded by titans in the forest where they dwell 
and borne away by them, the unfortunate large-eyed Sita will 
be crying out pitifully like a wounded osprey. 
" In this valley Sita of gracious mien, sitting beside me, 
addressed thee with gentle words and sweet smiles, O Laksh mana. Is she perchance wandering on the banks of this most 
beautiful of rivers, the Godaveri, so loved by her, but no, 
she was never wont to walk alone ! She whose face resembled 
the lotus, her eyes like their petals, has gone to gather water 
lilies, but how is this possible, since without me she would 
never gather flowers ? 
" Has she entered the forest full of blossoming trees, fre quented by flocks of birds of every kind ? Alas, no ! She was 
too timid to venture forth alone and would have died of fear ! 
O Sun, witness of all that takes place on earth and of every 
act, be it good or evil, has my beloved wandered away or has 
she been abducted? O tell me, lest I die of grief! O Wind, 
nothing in the world is unknown to thee ; say, has Sita, the 
flower of her race, lost her way or been carried off, or is 
she dead ? " 
Thus did Rama lament, a victim to grief and despair, and 
the valiant Saumitri, fixed in his duty, addressed him in words 
fitting to the occasion saying : — 
" O Hero, abandon thy grief and take heart ! Look on the 
disappearance of thy spouse with detachment and engage with 
132 
ARANYA KANDA 
vigour in thy search for her. Men of spirit do not allow 
themselves to be cast down, even in the race of extreme 
adversity." 
Thus did the highly powerful Lakshmana speak, despite 
his distress, but Rama, the foremost of the House of Raghu, 
paid no heed to his words and once again gave himself up 
to his great sorrow. 
CHAPTER 64 
Rama's Wrath 
Stricken with grief, Rama addressed Lakshmana in broken 
accents, saying : — " O Lakshmana, repair with all haste to the river 
Godaveri; it may be that Sita has gone thither to gather lotuses." 
At these words, Lakshmana immediately proceeded to the 
lovely river Godaveri and having visited the sacred fords, 
returning, spoke to Rama, saying : — 
" I have searched all the holy places but I have not seen her 
anywhere nor does she answer to my call. Where can Vaidehi 
have gone ? I do not know where that lady of slender waist 
can be, O Rama." 
Hearing Lakshmana speak thus, the unfortunate Rama, dis tracted with anxiety, ran to the banks of the Godaveri river 
and there cried out : — " Where is Sita ? " 
But neither the spirits of the forest nor the river dared to 
inform Rama that she had been borne away by that Indra of 
Titans who merited death. 
The Godaveri, recollecting the former exploits of the wicked 
Ravana, was restrained by fear from imparting what was 
known to her of Vaidehi's fate. The river's silence caused 
Rama to abandon all hope of seeing Sita again and overcome 
with despair at her disappearance he said to Saumitri : — 
" The beloved Godaveri has no answer for me, O Lakshmana. 
What shall I say to Janaka or Vaidehi's mother when, returning 
without her, we meet once more ? Seeing me without Vaidehi, 
I shall become an object of odium to them. 
" When, dispossessed of my kingdom} I was forced to live 
in the forest on wild fruits, my misery was assuaged by the 
i33 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Princess of Videha. Where is she now ? Far from my kins men, unable to find Vaidehi, how shall I pass the long nights • 
without sleep ? 
" I have searched everywhere, by the Mandakini, in 
Janasthana and on the mountain Prasravana to find Sita. O Hero, 
observe the wild deer, full of energy, who regard me unceasingly 
and by their glances seem to wish to communicate with me." 
Beholding them, that Lion among Men, Raghava, fixing his 
gaze on them cried : — " Where is Sita ? " in a voice broken 
by sobs. Thus addressed by that Lord of Men, the deer rose 
and turned their heads towards the south, looking upward, 
thus indicating the path by which Sita had been borne away. 
Thereafter those deer, turning southwards, sometimes 
fixing their gaze on that Chief of Men and then looking towards 
the sky, emitted cries, running in front of the two brothers, 
seeking to attract their attention, and Lakshmana, understanding 
their movements and their cries, said to his elder brother : — 
" O My Lord, since thou accosted these deer saying : 
* Where is Sita ? ' they, rising up, have indicated a southerly 
direction, let us therefore follow that path ; perchance we 
shall discover some trace of that noble lady or she herself." 
" Be it so " answered Kakutstha, directing his step towards 
the south, followed by Lakshmana. Thereafter casting his gaze 
on the earth, he observed some flowers scattered on the ground 
and, exceedingly distressed, said to his brother : — 
" O Lakshmana, I remember these flowers, for I gathered 
them in the forest and gave them to Vaidehi, with these she 
decorated her hair. Methinks the sun, the wind and the earth 
have preserved them for my pleasure." 
Thereafter Rama addressed the mountain of innumerable 
torrents, saying : — 
" O Lord of the Hills, hast thou seen that princess of lovely 
limbs, that gracious one I left in this charming grove ? " 
Thereupon, in tones of anguish he began to threaten that 
mountain, as a lion roars in the presence of a deer, and cried 
out : — " O Mountain, show me that lady whose skin resembles 
beaten gold or I will shatter thy crests." 
Thus questioned by Rama concerning Sita, the Princess of 
Mithila, the mountain would fain have spoken but through 
»34 
ARANYA KANDA 
fear of Ravana it remained silent ; whereupon the son of 
Dasaratha addressed that rocky mass, saying ; — 
" My fiery arrows shall reduce thee to ashes, thou shalt be 
stripped of thy verdure, thy trees, and thy creepers, and none 
shall inhabit thee. O Lakshmana, this river too shall be 
dried up by me if it does not reveal where Sita may be found, 
whose radiance resembles the full moon in her course." 
In his wrath, Rama would fain have consumed the mountain 
with his glance, when suddenly he beheld the imprint of the 
titan's foot on the ground and those of Vaidehi, who in her 
terror had run hither and thither before being dragged away 
by him. 
Seeing the marks of Sita's feet and those of the titan, 
with the shattered bow, two quivers and parts of the chariot, 
Rama, his heart beating rapidly, said to his beloved brother : — 
" See, O Lakshmana, the scattered fragments of Vaidehi's 
ornaments and the many garlands and the drops of blood 
shining like molten gold covering the earth on every side. 
It is certain, O Lakshmana, that the titans who change their 
form at will, have hewn the body of Sita to pieces, which they 
have now devoured. On account of Sita, a terrible struggle 
has taken place here, O Saumitri. 
" This great bow, encrusted with pearls, marvellously inlaid, 
which is broken and lying on the earth, to whom can it belong, 
O Friend ? To what titan or to what God, O My Child, does 
this golden armour belong, bright as the rising sun, enriched 
with emeralds and pearls, the pieces of which are strewn on 
the earth ? Whose canopy is lying here, possessing a hundred 
staves, decorated with celestial garlands, its supports broken ? 
And whose are these mules, harnessed with gold, having 
goblins' heads, terrible to behold, that have been slain in the 
fight? This chariot of war, shining like a flame, which is 
overturned and broken, to whom does it belong? These 
arrows too, a hundred fingers in length, of terrifying aspect, 
their golden tips blunted, lying in a hundred fragments and 
the two quivers filled with excellent shafts, whose are they ? 
" See the charioteer lying on the earth, the lash and reins 
still in his hands, who was his master ? Without doubt these 
footprints are those of a mighty titan, O Lakshmana. Behold 
135 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
how under a thousand guises the bitter hatred of these titans, 
who are ruthless and able to change their form at will, is made 
manifest ! Alas, the blessed Vaidehi has been carried hence 
or she is dead and has been devoured ! If virtue was not able 
to protect Vaidehi from being carried away by stealth in the 
great forest and she has been devoured, O Lakshmana, how 
can even the great ones of this world offer me any solace ? 
The supreme Creator of the Universe Himself, were He to 
manifest compassion, would be misunderstood and held in 
contempt by the world, and Z, who am by nature gentle, who 
have subdued my senses and who exercise mercy, desiring 
the welfare of all, shall be thought wanting in valour by the 
Gods. 
" O Lakshmana, my virtues shall be overshadowed to-day, 
as thou shalt soon witness, and my wrath be manifest in the 
destruction of the demons and all created beings ! As the 
rising sun obscures the splendour of the moon, so will my 
great attributes be withdrawn and my naked splendour blaze 
forth ; there will be no escape for any in the Three Worlds, 
neither Yaksha, Gandharva, Pisacha, Rakshasa, Kinnera, 
nor man, O Lakshmana. Soon shalt thou see mine arrows 
filling the firmament, the planets stayed in their courses, the 
moon veiled, fire and wind restrained, the brightness of the 
sun obscured, the crests of the mountains shattered, the lakes 
dried up, creepers and trees uprooted and the ocean drained. 
" If the Gods do not bring back Sita to me, I shall blot out 
the Three Worlds ! Then, O Saumitri they will be forced to 
acknowledge my prowess ! None shall find refuge anywhere in 
space, O Lakshmana j to-day thou shalt see the universe pass 
beyond its bournes. With the help of the arrows loosed from 
my bow, which I shall stretch up to mine ear, no being will 
be able to survive ; for Sita's sake I shall rid the world of 
goblins and demons and the Gods shall witness the power of 
these missiles, loosed in my wrath. 
" The worlds of the Gods, Giants, Yakshas and Titans will 
be annihilated under the impact of my shafts. With mine 
arrows I shall shatter the defences of the Three Worlds, if 
the Gods do not restore Vaidehi to me as she was before she 
was borne away. If they do not bring back my beloved un- 
136 
ARANYA KANDA 
harmed, I shall lay waste the entire universe and ail contained 
therein. Until I find myself in Sita's presence once more, 
I shall let loose every weapon of destruction." 
Having spoken thus, Rama, his eyes flashing with anger, his 
lips compressed and trembling, tied fast his robe of bark and 
deerskin and knotted his hair, whereupon that sagacious One 
resembled Rudra bent upon the destruction of Tripura. 
Taking his bow from Lakshmana's hands, he drew it with 
might, selecting a terrible steel-pointed shaft resembling a 
venomous serpent, and the effulgent Rama, filled with wrath, 
the Scourge of his Foes, resembling the Fire at the destruction 
of the world, said : — 
" As beings cannot escape old age, destiny or death, so is 
none able to restrain my wrath ! O Lakshmana, if I do not 
recover Sita this day in all her pristine beauty, I shall destroy 
the universe with its Gods, Gandharvas, human beings, 
Punnagas and mountains." 
CHAPTER 65 
Lakshmana seeks to pacify Rama 
A prey to grief on account of Sita's abduction, Rama, resembling 
the Fire of Dissolution, sought to bring about the destruction 
of the Worlds. 
With burning sighs he contemplated the stringed bow, as 
Hara at the end of the world-cycle stands ready to consume 
the universe. 
Seeing Rama transported with rage, hitherto never manifested 
by him, Lakshmana, his features pale with terror, addressed him 
with joined palms, saying : — 
" Formerly thou wert ever gentle, of controlled mind and 
devoted to the welfare of all beings, do not now give way to 
wrath and renounce thy true nature. As the radiance of the 
moon, the brilliance of the sun, the velocity of the wind and 
the forbearance of the earth, so is thy glory manifested without 
equal and without end. Wherefore dost thou seek to destroy 
the worlds on account of one man's sin ? 
137 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
" It is not yet known to whom this shattered chariot belongs 
nor because of whom nor between whom, the struggle, of 
which we see the traces, took place. This spot bears the marks 
of wheels and feet and is sprinkled with drops of blood ; it is 
the scene of a desperate struggle, O Son of a King, but it is 
a fight between single combatants, O Most Eloquent of Men ! 
I see no trace of a great army and it is not fitting that thou 
shouldst destroy the worlds on account of one man. 
" Kings should always rule with justice, gentleness and 
moderation. Thou wast ever the refuge of all beings and 
their supreme asylum. Who would condone the bearing 
away of thy consort, O Raghava ? Rivers, seas, mountains, 
Gods, Gandharvas and Danavas have no desire to displease 
thee, even as the officiating priest will not harm the one under taking a sacrifice after he has performed the preparatory rites. 
" O Prince, it is for thee to seek out Site's abductor, followed 
by the great sages and by me with my bow. We will search the 
ocean, the hills, the forests, the deep_ caves and innumerable 
lakes filled with lotuses. We will enquire of the Gods and 
Gandharvas in every region, until we find the captor of 
thy consort. If the Chiefs of the Gods do not restore thy 
wife peaceably, then, O King of Koshala, adopt those measures 
that thou considerest fitting. If, through gentleness, humility 
and prudence, thou dost not regain thy spouse, O Indra among 
Men, then let loose thine innumerable golden-tipped arrows, 
resembling Mahendra's thunderbolts." 
CHAPTER 66 
Lakskmana seeks to inspire Rama with Courage 
Overcome by grief and wailing like one orphaned, Rama, 
sick at heart, was plunged in misery, whereupon Lakshmana, 
the son of Sumitra, taking hold of his feet and pressing them, 
sought to console and comfort him, saying : — 
" By great austerity and innumerable pious acts did the 
King Dasaratha obtain thee, as the Celestials acquired the 
138 
ARANYA KANDA 
Nectar of Immortality. Bound to thee by thy virtues, that 
great monarch on thy departure returned to the heavenly 
region, thus have we heard from Bharata. If thou art not 
able to endure the calamity that has overtaken thee, then how 
should an ordinary man do so ? 
" O Chief of Men, take courage ! What living being is not 
subject to adversity, which approaches like a flame and instantly 
passes away? Even so is the world. Did not Yayati, the 
son of Nahusha, fall from heaven overcome by ill fortune ? 
In a single day the great Sage Vasishtha, the chief priest of 
our sire, was bereft of four hundred sons born to him ; and 
the Mother of the World, the Earth herself, revered by all, is 
sometimes known to tremble, O Master of Koshala I The 
sun and moon, the eyes of the world, the very symbols of 
virtue by whom all things are ordered, suffer eclipse. Those 
great beings, the Gods themselves, are subject to fate, O Lion 
among Men ; how much more man ? It is said that even Indra 
and the Gods endure vicissitudes ; it doth not behove thee, 
therefore, to lament. 
*' Even should Vaidehi be dead or carried away, O Raghava, 
it is not worthy of thee to yield to despair like a common man. 
Thine equals are never moved even in the greatest perils but 
look on all with equanimity, O Kakutstha ! 
" O Thou Best of Men, after due consideration, discriminate 
between that which is good and that which is evil ; persons of 
right wisdom are ever cognizant of what is right or wrong. 
Owing to the element of uncertainty, one cannot at once 
distinguish the advantage or disadvantage of a deed, but if one 
fails to act the desired result will not take place. Thus hast 
thou often instructed me, O Hero, and who is able to teach thee 
anything? Not even Brihaspati himself. Even the Gods are 
powerless to fix the limit of thy wisdom, O Thou of Mighty 
Intellect. 
" I would fain arouse the power that sorrow has quenched 
in *thee ! Having reflected on the strength of the Gods, of 
men and of thyself, O Lion of the Ikshwakus, prepare to 
overcome thine enemies ! Of what use were it for thee to 
destroy the world, O Thou Best of Men ? Seek out thy per fidious adversary and put an end to his life ! " 
139 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 67 
Rama encounters Jatayu 
At these apposite words, full of wisdom, uttered by his younger 
brother Lakshmana, Raghava, regaining possession of himself, 
rallied his courage anew. Controlling his wrath, the long armed Rama, leaning on his marvellous bow, said to 
Lakshmana : — " O My Friend, what should be done ? Whither 
shall we go, O Lakshmana ? How shall we find Sita again ? 
Let us consider these things carefully." 
To these anxious enquiries, Lakshmana answered : — " It is 
for thee to search Janasthana which is inhabited by innumerable 
titans and covered with trees and .creepers of every kind. 
There, inaccessible cliffs, chasms and caves are to be found 
and dark caverns inhabited by herds of wild beasts, the retreat 
of Kinneras and the resort of Gandharvas ; with me explore 
these places. As the mountains are not affected by tempest, 
neither can adversity daunt the wise such as thou, O Lion 
among Men." 
Thus speaking, Lakshmana began to scour the forest, and 
Rama, still chafing under adversity, advanced holding his bow 
on which was strung a formidable steel-pointed shaft, when 
suddenly he beheld Jatayu, that excellent King of Birds, 
resembling a mountain peak, lying on the earth covered with 
blood. Seeing that great vulture, like unto the crest of a 
mountain, Rama said to Lakshmana : — 
" Without doubt, here is the titan, who, ranging the forest 
under the guise of a vulture, has destroyed Sita, the Princess 
of Videha ! Having satisfied himself by devouring that large eyed princess, he is resting at ease ; I shall pierce him with my 
dread and fiery shafts that fly straight to their target." 
Speaking thus, Rama, fixing a sharp arrow on his bow, ran 
towards him and in his ire it seemed he would destroy the 
earth, whose boundaries are the sea. 
140 
ARANYA KANDA 
Vomiting blood, that bird then addressed Rama the son of 
Dasaratha, in the mournful accents of one about to die, 
saying: — 
" O Thou of long life, that divinity whom thou seefcest in 
the great forest, as one does a healing herb,1 has been borne 
away by Havana, as has my life also. 
" O Raghava, in the absence of Lakshmana and thyself, 
that princess was seen by me, being dragged away by the all powerful Ravana. Flying to the aid of Sita, O Lord, Ravana 
was thrown to the earth by me in the struggle that ensued, 
and his chariot and canopy shattered. With a stroke of my 
wing, I slew the charioteer, but being at the end of my strength, 
my two wings were severed by Ravana's sword, and he, seizing 
hold of Sita, the Princess of Videha, escaped into the air. 
That titan has left me here to die ; do not slay me, O Prince." 
Receiving these precious tidings concerning Sita, Rama, 
dropping his great bow, embraced the King of the Vultures, 
and then, despite his resolve, fell to the ground overcome with 
grief and began to lament with Lakshmana. Seeing Jatayu 
alone in that perilous and isolated pathway, moaning un ceasingly, Rama, overwhelmed with pity, said to Saumitri : — 
" The loss of my kingdom, exile to the forest, the abduction 
of Sita and the death of this Twice-born, renders my fate such 
that it would consume fire itself. Even were the sea filled 
to the brim and I to enter it this day, that Lord of the Rivers 
would dry up on account of my misfortunes. 
" Such is the adversity that encompasses me that there is 
none in all the worlds amongst animate and inanimate beings 
who is so wretched as I ! On account of mine evil karma, this 
childhood friend of my sire, the mighty King of the Vultures, 
lies dying on the earth ! " 
Repeating these words again and again to Lakshmana who 
accompanied him, Rama began to caress Jatayu, passing his 
hand lovingly over the body of his father's friend. Thereafter 
taking the King of the Vultures, whose wings were severed 
and who was bathed in blood, in his arms, he said :— 
" Where has Maithili gone, who is dearer to me than life ? " 
and having spoken thus, Raghava sank down on the earth. 
1 Lit : Qshadi or Oshadi Prastha ' the place of medicinal herbs '. 
141 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 68 
Jatayu's Death 
In the presence of the vulture, whom the terrible Ravana had 
struck down, Rama, full of compassion for all, addressed the 
son of Saumitri in these words : — 
" This bird, who sought to defend my interests, has been 
mortally wounded in the struggle with the titan and for my 
sake now lies dying here. Its vital breaths are barely per ceptible, O Lakshmana, its eyes are dim and it is unable to speak. 
" O Jatayu, if it be possible for thee, then say what has 
become of Sita and how thou hast come to this sorry pass. 
For what reason has Ravana carried away my dear one ? How 
did that radiant and enchanting face, resembling the moon, 
appear at that time, O Best of the Twice-born. What words 
did Sita utter at that moment? What is the strength, the 
appearance and the karma of that titan ? Where does he 
dwell, O Friend, answer me ! " 
Beholding Rama lamenting like an orphan, the virtuous 
Jatayu answered in feeble accents : — 
" Sita has been carried away by that Indra of Titans, 
Ravana, that evil wretch who resorts to the aid of sorcery and 
is able to loose the wind and the tempest. O Dear Child, I 
being exhausted, that Prowler of the Night severed my two 
wings and, thereafter taking hold of Sita, fled in a southerly 
direction. My breathing is laboured and my sight dim, O 
Raghava, I see before me the golden trees with leaves formed 
of Ushira.1 The hour in which Ravana bore Sita away was 
that in which the loser soon recovers that which is lost, 
1 Vindya ' is its name, O Kakutstha, and Ravana was unaware 
of it. Like a fish that swallows the bait, he will soon perish ! 
Do not, therefore, despair of recovering Janaki; thou wilt 
soon sport with her, having slain Ravana in battle 1 " 
While the vulture was thus replying to Rama, blood and 
morsels of flesh flowed from his beak and, on the verge of 
death, retaining his consciousness, Jatayu added : — " Ravana is 
1 TJshira — A hair-like grass said to grow on the trees in hell. 
142 
ARANYA KANDA 
the son of Vishravas and the brother of Vishravana ! " and 
thereafter yielded up his life. 
" Speak ! Speak further ! " cried Rama, addressing him 
with joined palms, but the life-breaths, withdrawn from that 
vulture's body, were already dissipated. Thereupon the King 
of the Vultures fell on the earth, his legs, body and head 
stretched out and, beholding that bird resembling a mountain 
of vast proportions, that bird of reddened eyes, deprived of life, 
Rama, staggering under the weight of his misfortune, said to 
Saumitri in bitter tones : — 
" Passing many years happily in the forest, the resort of 
titans, this bird has at length given up his life ! Having lived 
innumerable years, he now lies here inanimate ! None can 
withstand the course of destiny ! Behold, O Lakshmana, this 
vulture who died in my service having sought to protect Sita, and 
who has been slain by Ravana of superior power. He renounced 
the dominion bequeathed to him by his ancestors and sacrificed 
his life for my sake. Undoubtedly the virtuous practise 
courage, devotion and the fulfilment of duty, even in the 
animal kingdom, O Saumitri ! I did not feel so keen a grief 
for Sita's abduction as for the death of this vulture, who has 
sacrificed himself for me, O Scourger of Thy Foes ! 
" I hold this King of Birds in the same veneration as I did 
the illustrious and fortunate monarch, Dasaratha, O Saumitri ! 
Do thou bring fuel that I may ignite the pyre of that King of 
Vultures, who died for me. Placing the body of that protector 
of the realm of winged creatures on the funeral pile, who 
has been destroyed by the cruel titan, I shall cremate it. 
O King of the Vultures, O Magnanimous Being, cremated 
and blessed by me, depart, and ascend to those regions, 
further than which it is not possible to go and which are the 
abode of those who habitually offer sacrifice, those heroes 
who never retreat on the batde field and those who distribute 
land in charity." 
With these words, the virtuous Rama placed the King of 
Winged Creatures on the funeral pyre and, full of grief, ignited 
the flame as if performing the rite for his own kinsman. 
Thereafter, the illustrious Rama, accompanied by Saumitri, 
entered the forest and, killing a few fet Rohi deer, strewed the 
143 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
flesh on the green grass as an oblation to that bird. Tearing 
off the flesh of those deer and kneading it into balls, he offered 
it to the vulture in that pleasant forest land, placing it on fresh 
grass. Thereafter, in order that Jatayu might soon reach the 
celestial abode, he recited those sacred formulas uttered by the 
brahmins, after which the two princes repaired to the Godaveri 
river to offer water in honour of the kingly bird. Following 
the traditional rites, those two Descendants of Raghu bathed 
and performed the Udaka1 ceremony for the King of the 
Vultures, who, having fallen on the held of battle, had executed 
a glorious and difficult deed and now, blessed by Rama, had 
attained to the place prepared for him in the realm of the 
saints. 
Thereupon those two princes, after offering the last rites 
in honour of that excellent bird, as if to their sire, entered 
the forest, their minds set on the recovery of Sita, like Vishnu 
and Vasava, the Sovereigns of the Gods. 
CHAPTER 69 
Rama and Lakskmana meet Ayomukki and Kabandha 
Having performed the purificatory rites in honour of Jatayu, 
the two princes entered the forest in quest of Sita, proceeding 
in a south-westerly direction. Armed with sword, bow and 
arrow, those offshoots of the House of Ikshwaku followed a 
hitherto untrodden path, overgrown with bushes, trees and 
creepers of various kinds, which was difficult of access, with 
dense thickets on either side and of sinister appearance; never theless the two mighty warriors pressed on through that vast 
and dangerous wood. 
Having traversed Janasthana and covered a further three 
leagues, those brothers, endowed with great energy, penetrated 
into the thick woodlands of the Krauncha Forest, which 
resembled a group of clouds and presented a smiling aspect 
1 Udaka Ceremony — ritual presentation of water to the ancestors. 
144 
ARANYA KANDA 
with its many brilliant flowers and the herds of wild deer and 
flocks of birds that inhabited it. 
After exploring this forest, anxious to behold the Princess of 
Videha once more, sometimes halting to bewail her disappear ance, the two brothers resumed their journey, and covering a 
distance of three leagues came to the hermitage of Matanga. 
Having searched the whole forest filled with fearful beasts 
and birds and planted with innumerable trees and dense 
thickets, the two sons of Dasaratha beheld a cave in the moun tain, deep as the region under the earth where eternal darkness 
reigns. 
Then those two Lions among Men, approaching that cave, 
perceived the vast shape of a female titan of hideous appear ance. Fearful of aspect, she was an object of terror to weaker 
creatures with her loathsome countenance, vast stomach, sharp 
teeth, immense stature and harsh voice. 
This monster subsisted on the flesh of ferocious beasts and 
now appeared before Rama and Lakshmana, her hair dis hevelled, and addressed them, saying : — 
" Come let us pass the time in dalliance together." There after she laid hold of Lakshmana, who had preceded his brother 
and added: — 
" I am named Ayomukhi, I am thine ; do thou become my 
lord, O Hero ! Let us give ourselves up to a long life of 
pleasure on the summits of the mountains and among the 
islands in the rivers." 
Hearing these words, the Slayer of his Foes, Lakshmana, 
full of wrath, drew his sword and cut off her ears, nose and 
breasts. Her ears and nose being severed, that terrible titan 
ran away with all speed, and when she had disappeared, the 
two brothers, Rama and Lakshmana, Scourgers of their Foes, 
hastily pressed on and entered the dense forest. 
Thereafter the mighty Lakshmana, full of loyalty, charm 
and nobility, addressed bis resplendent brother with joined 
palms, saying: — 
" I am conscious of a violent throbbing in my left arm and 
my mind is filled with apprehension, whilst on every side I 
perceive inauspicious omens ; do thou therefore hold thyself 
in readiness, O Great One, and follow my counsel; these 
145 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
different portents foretell imminent danger. The Vanchulaka bird 
is emitting fearful cries which indicate a speedy victory for us." 
Thereupon the two brothers courageously began to explore 
the entire forest, when a terrible clamour arose appearing to 
rend the trees ; such was the uproar that it seemed as though 
a mighty wind had suddenly swept through the forest. 
Seeking to ascertain the cause of this disturbance, Rama, 
armed with a sword, bow in hand, advancing with his younger 
brother, beheld a titan of vast proportions, possessing huge 
thighs, standing before him. Headless, his mouth in his belly, 
covered with brisding hairs, in stature equal to a mountain, 
his complexion that of a dark cloud, terrible to look upon, his 
voice resounded like thunder. 
Shining like a lit torch, he seemed to emit sparks ; his single 
eye, furnished with yellow lids opening in his breast, was 
strange and hideous and this monster, possessed of enormous 
teeth, was licking his lips. Despite their ferocity and size, 
he fed on bears, lions, deer and birds, catching them with his 
great arms at a distance of four miles. With his hands he 
seized hold of flocks of birds and herds of deer, which he put 
into his mouth. 
Having observed them a mile off, he obstructed the progress 
of the two brothers and stood awaiting them. That colossal, 
hideous and dreadful creature of sinister aspect, with his 
trunk and vast arras, fearful to behold, stretching out, seized 
the two valiant brothers and gripped them with all his strength. 
On account of his coolness and courage, the valiant Raghava 
remained unmoved, but Lakshmana, being a mere stripling and 
volatile by nature, began to tremble, and that younger brother 
of Raghava said to him : — 
" O Hero, behold how I have fallen into the power of this 
titan ; do thou leave me as an offering to the evil forces and 
go thy way happily ; thou wilt soon be re-united with Vaidehi, 
this is my firm conviction ! O Kakutstha, when thou hast 
regained the kingdom of thy forbears and art installed on the 
throne, remember me ! " 
At these words, uttered by Lakshmana, the son of Sumitra, 
Rama answered : — " Have no fear, O Valiant One, persons of 
thy valour are never perturbed." 
146 
ARANYA KANDA 
Meanwhile the headless titan, of huge arms, the foremost 
among the giants, said to them : — 
" Who are you, whose shoulders resemble a bull's, armed 
with great swords and bows ? It is fortunate indeed for me that 
by chance you have come within my range in this dangerous 
place. Say for what reason you have come here, where I wait 
ravaged by hunger, ye who are armed with arrows, bows and 
swords and resemble bulls with pointed horns? Having 
approached me, your death is imminent." 
Hearing the words of the wicked Kabandha, Rama, his face 
growing pale, said to Lakshmana : — 
"We have fallen from one danger into a greater one, O 
Hero ; this ill chance may cost us our lives without our being 
able to rejoin our beloved Sita. The power of destiny over 
all beings is inexorable, O Lakshmana ! See, O Lion among 
Men, how ill-fortune drives us to the last extremity ; there is 
nothing that weighs so heavily on man as destiny. Even the 
brave, the mighty, the great and skilful warriors on the field 
of battle, overtaken by destiny, are swept away like banks 
of sand." 
Thus spoke that heroic and illustrious son of Dasaratha, filled 
with distress, his eyes fixed on Saumitri, while in his soul his 
composure was fully established. 
CHAPTER 70 
Rama and Lakshmana sever the Arms of Kabandha 
Seeing the two brothers fallen into bis arms as if into a snare, 
Kabandha said to them : — 
" What ails you, O Foremost among Warriors ? Since I am 
tormented with hunger, fate has destined you for my food and 
for this reason has deprived you of your wits." 
Hearing these words Lakshmana, though sore distressed, 
determined to display his valour and addressed Rama in words 
worthy of the occasion, saying : — 
M7 l 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
" We shall soon become the food of this vile demon, who 
with his vast and powerful arms subdues all beings ; let us 
with our swords sever his arms with all speed, O Lord, or he 
will make an end of us. It is shameful for warriors to make 
away with those who cannot defend themselves like an animal 
deprived of its freedom that is led to sacrifice." 
These words infuriated the demon, who opened his terrible 
mouth wide, preparing to devour them, whereupon the two 
brothers, choosing a favourable moment, as if in sport cut off 
bis two arms at the shoulders, Rama cutting the right and 
Lakshmana with a vigorous stroke of his sword, the left. There upon Kabandha, his vast arms severed, emitting loud shrieks 
which resounded through the earth and sky like thunder, fell 
upon the ground. Beholding his two arms severed and the 
blood flowing in streams, the unfortunate demon enquired of 
those two warriors in feeble accents : — " Who are you ? " 
Thus accosted, the supremely courageous Lakshmana began 
to extol the virtues of Kakutstha, saying : — 
" This is Rama, the descendant of the House of Ikshwaku, 
known throughout the earth, and I am his younger brother, 
Lakshmana. Deprived of his kingdom by the Queen Kaikeyi, 
Raghava was exiled to the great forest, where he lived with his 
consort and myself. While this hero, mighty as a God, dwelt 
in that pastoral retreat, a titan bore away his consort, in search 
of whom we have come hither. 
" And thou, who art thou, wandering in these woods emitting 
flames, thy thighs sunk into thy body ? " 
On hearing Lakshmana, Kabandha, calling Indra's words to 
mind, answered joyfully : — 
" Welcome to you, O Tigers among Men, beholding you 
is my salvation ; for my good, you have cut off my arms. Do 
you hear, how, due to mine arrogance, I came to assume this 
monstrous shape. O Illustrious Ones, I snail relate all to you 
truthfully." 
148 
ARANYA KANDA 
CHAPTER 71 
Kabandha tells his Story 
" O Long-armed Rama, formerly I was filled with unimaginable 
energy and courage ; my beauty was famed throughout the 
Three Worlds and equal to the sun, the moon and Indra 
himself. Assuming a terrible form, I became an object of 
fear to all and struck terror into the hearts of the ascetics living 
in the forest. 
" O Rama, on a certain occasion I incurred the wrath of a 
great Rishi named Sthulashira, whom I tormented in this 
loathsome shape, whilst he was gathering wild fruits. Fixing 
his gaze on me, he pronounced a terrible curse, saying : — 
* Do thou retain for ever this fearful form, assumed by thee 
in order to harm others ! * 
" Appealing to that provoked ascetic to rescind his curse, 
he took compassion on me and said : ' When Rama cremates 
thee in the lonely forest, having severed both thine arms, 
thou shalt regain thy great and wonderful form.' 
" O Lakshmana, know that I am really the son of Danu, 
who was extremely handsome to look upon ; my present 
appearance is due to a curse pronounced by Indra on the 
field of battle. 
" By rigorous penances I gained the goodwill of Brahma, 
and he granted me the boon of longevity. Thereafter I was 
filled with pride and, thinking ' What can Indra do to me 
now ', I challenged him to combat, whereupon he hurled his 
mace of a hundred edges at me. By the force of this weapon, 
my thighs and head were thrust into my body ; I prayed to 
him to end my life, but he, saying : ' May the words of Brahma 
prove true ', compelled me to go on living. Then I addressed 
Mahendra, saying: — 'How shall I live without food, since 
thou hast thrust my head and thighs into my body ? * 
149 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
" Thereat, Indra caused my arms to extend over four miles 
and placed a mouth with sharp teeth in my belly. Ever 
since, stretching out my arms, I wander in the forest and 
seize hold of lions, tigers and deer and put them into my 
mouth. Then Indra said to me : * When Rama and Lakshmana 
cut off thine arms, thou shalt attain heaven \ 
" Since then, O Great One, I have laid hold on every living 
being I have found in the forest and have been awaiting Rama 
to sever my arms ; anticipating this, I have waited for death. 
Now, O Lord, thou hast come, be thou blessed ! None but 
thou can put an end to my life ; the words of the great Rishi 
have proved true, O Illustrious One. I will put my counsel 
at thy service, O Bull among Men, and, when I have received 
the consecration of fire, will form a pact of friendship with 
you both." 
At these words of Danu, Rama, in the hearing of Lakshmana, 
answered him, saying : — 
" Ravana has borne away mine illustrious consort, Sita, 
whilst I and my brother were absent from the hermitage. I 
am conversant only with the name of that titan but not with 
his form, nor are we acquainted with his strength, nor where 
he dwells. Helpless and distressed, we wander here and there 
in the forest ; it behoveth thee to show thy compassion to us. 
After gathering all the branches that are dry and have been 
broken down by elephants and digging a large pit, we will 
cremate thee at the time indicated by thee. Do thou tell us 
who has carried Sita away and where she is to be found. 
Render us this great service, if thou art acquainted with the 
truth." 
Thus addressed by Rama, Danu, skilled in speech, answered 
Raghava, saying : — " I am not possessed of divine foresight, 
neither am I acquainted with the Princess Sita, but being 
cremated by thee, resuming my natural form, I shall be able 
to point out one to thee, who will know what has become of 
her. Without being consumed by fire, I am unable to tell 
thee who is acquainted with that titan who has carried Sita 
away. Through a curse, my foresight has been destroyed, 
O Raghava, and through mine own fault I have become an 
object of loathing to the whole world, but before the sun with 
150 
ARANYA KANDA 
his tired steeds withdraws behind the western horizon cast 
me into the pit, O Rama, and cremate me according to the 
traditional rites. 
" Cremated by thee with due ceremonial, O Joy of the 
House of Raghu, I shall tell thee who is acquainted with that 
titan. It is for thee to seal a pact of friendship with him 
according to the law. O Raghava, that swift-footed hero will 
lend thee his assistance. 
" For one reason or another, he has traversed the Three 
Worlds and there is nothing in the Universe that is not known 
to him." 
CHAPTER 72 
Kabandha tells Rama how to find Sita 
After Kabandha had spoken thus, those two warriors, the 
foremost among men, Rama and Lakshmana, sought out a 
hollow on the mountain-side and ignited a fire. With the aid 
of glowing brands, Lakshmana lit the pyre that burst into 
flame on every side. The vast trunk of Kabandha began to 
melt in the heat of the fire like a lump of butter, and later 
the powerful Kabandha, scattering the ashes, rose up from the 
pyre wearing spotless raiment and a celestial garland, and that 
handsome demon, his limbs covered with diverse ornaments, 
ascended a chariot of dazzling beauty drawn by swans, in his 
splendour illumining the ten regions. Thereafter, standing in 
the sky, he addressed Rama, saying : — 
" Learn, O Raghava, by what means thou shalt be able to 
recover Sita. There are six expedients1 by which misfortune 
1 Six expedients : 
Sand hi — making peace. 
Vigraha — engaging in war. 
Yana — inarching against the enemy. 
Ashana — maintaining a post against the enemy. 
Daidibhava — sowing dissention. 
Samshraya — seeking the protection of others. 
15' 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
may be combated, and in the light of which all things should 
be considered. He who has fallen into the worst misfortune 
may find solace if he has someone with whom to share his lot, 
but thou and Lakshmana are deprived of this consolation in 
the calamity that has befallen you through the theft of Sita. 
O Rama, thou who art thyself the foremost of friends art in 
need of a friend. After due reflection, I see no possibility 
of success for thee except by this. 
" Hearken, O Rama, to what I am about to tell thee. There 
is a monkey named Sugriva, who was banished in anger by 
his brother Bali, the son of Indra. This sagacious and valiant 
Sugriva with four of his companions inhabits the lofty mountain 
Rishyamuka situated on the borders of Lake Fampa. 
" This Indra among Monkeys, who is full of energy and 
prowess, of brilliant appearance, loyal, temperate, intelligent 
and magnanimous, skilful, courageous, wise and powerful, 
has been banished by his brother for the sake of the kingdom. 
He will surely prove thy friend and assist thee in thy search 
for Sita. O Rama, do not be disturbed on this account ; 
that which is destined must come to pass. O Lion among the 
Ikshwakus, fate is inexorable ! 
" Do thou go hence with all speed, O Valiant Raghava, and 
seek out the powerful Sugriva. Without delay conclude an 
alliance with him and, swearing mutual loyalty in the presence 
of fire, unite thyself with that beneficent being. Thou shouldst 
not disregard that King of the Monkey Tribe, Sugriva, who 
is of a grateful disposition, able to change his form at will and 
worthy of thy friendship. Thou too wilt be able to accomplish 
his designs, but benefited by thee or no, he will execute thy 
purpose. 
" This son of Riksharajas' consort and of Bhaskara, 
wanders about resdessly on the borders of Lake Pampa and is 
at war with Bali. Laying aside thy weapons, seek out the 
retreat of that monkey on the Rishyamuka Mountain without 
delay and enter into a bond of friendship with that inhabitant 
of the forest. That Foremost of Monkeys is conversant with 
all the haunts of the flesh-eating titans in the world and has 
thoroughly explored their retreats ; there is nothing on this 
earth that is not known to him, O Raghava. 
152 
ARANYA KANDA 
" As long as the many-rayed sun continues to shine, O 
Scourge of Thy Foes, he with his companions will search 
the rivers, the crags, the inaccessible mountains and the caves 
for thy consort. He will send out his monkeys of vast stature to 
scour every region in order to find Sita, separation from whom 
has rent thine heart. He will seek for Maithili of lovely limbs 
even in Ravana's own abode. Should thine irreproachable and 
beloved Sita have been taken to the summit of Mount Meru or 
abandoned in the nethermost hell, that Lion among the Monkey 
Tribe, having slain the titans, will restore her to thee." 
chapter 73 
Kabandka's Counsel to Rama 
Having revealed the way to recover Sita, the resourceful 
Kabandha counselled Rama in the following significant words, 
saying : — 
" This is the path leading westwards to the Mount Rish yamuka, O Rama, abounding in blossoming trees ; Jambu, 
Priyala, Panasa, Nyagrodha, Plaksha, Tinduka, Ashwattha, 
Karnikara, Cuta, Naga, Tilaka, Naktamala, Nilashoka, Kadamba, 
Karavira, Agnimukha, Ashoka, Raktachanda, Paribhadraka and 
many other trees grow there and, climbing or bending them 
by force, they should be used by you to sustain yourselves on 
the way with their sweet fruits. 
"Passing through these flowery woodlands, O Kakutstha, 
thou wilt reach others resembling the Nandana Gardens, 
where, as with the northern Kurus, the trees bear fruit and 
produce honey in every month of the year and every season 
is represented simultaneously as in the forest of Chaitaratha. 
There, great trees with mighty branches, bowed under the 
weight of their fruit, resemble towering clouds on the mountain 
side. Lakshmana will climb those trees with ease or pull 
them down to offer thee the fruit equal in taste to the Nectar 
of Immortality. Ranging over those lovely mountains, wander ing from hill to hill and wood to wood, O Hero, ye shall reach 
the lake Pampa covered with lotuses, free from boulders and 
153 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
gravel, whose level banks present no crevice and therefore no 
danger of falling. O Rama, its bed is sandy and it is covered 
with floating lilies ; swans, ducks, herons and ospreys are 
heard calling sweetly on the waters of that lake ; nor do they 
fear man, O Raghava, since none has ever hunted there. Do 
ye feed on these birds, fat as butter, O Rama, as well as on 
Rohita, Chakratunda and Nala. 
" O Rama, the devoted Lakshmana will offer thee diverse 
and excellent fish, devoid of scale or fin, plump, possessing a 
single bone, which may be speared with arrows and roasted 
on the fire. And when thou hast feasted, Lakshmana, drawing 
pure water, fragrant with the scent of lotuses, fresh, limpid, 
sparkling like silver, shall offer it to thee on a lotus leaf. 
" In the evening, ranging here and there, Lakshmana will 
point out to thee the great monkeys who dwell in the woods 
and in the hollows of the hills, and thou shalt see those wild 
and savage apes, roaring like bulls, coming to the borders of the 
lake to drink. 
" Wandering abroad at dusk, thy grief will be assuaged on 
beholding the flowering trees and the auspicious waters of 
the lake, and thou shalt see the blossoming Tilaka and Naktamala 
trees with the red and white full-blown lotuses, which will 
dispel thy sorrow. . No man has ever gathered those blooms 
nor do the garlands made of them ever fade away, O Raghava, 
for the disciples of the great ascetic Matanga lived there, who, 
proficient in penance, laden with the wild fruits they had 
collected for their Guru, covered the earth with drops of their 
perspiration from which these flowers have sprung; by 
virtue of their austerities these blooms never die. 
" Those ascetics have now passed away but there still 
liveth one who served them, a mendicant woman named 
Shabari. O Kakutstha, she, who is ever fixed in her duty, is 
now extremely old and, on beholding thee who art honoured 
by the whole world, will ascend to heaven. 
" O Rama, having reached the western bank of Lake Pampa, 
thou shalt see a lovely, isolated and concealed spot, which is 
Matanga's hermitage. There, in fear of his divine authority, 
no elephant dare enter, though there be many. This place is 
known as the Matanga Wood, O Raghava, and there, 0 Joy 
154 
ARANYA KANDA 
of the House of Raghu, where every variety of bird sings and 
which resembles the Garden of Nandana or a celestial grove, 
thou wilt be able to rest. 
" The Rishyamuka mountain, covered with flowering trees 
and filled with birds, rises opposite Lake Pampa and is difficult 
of access, young elephants barring the way. This lofty moun tain was formerly created by Brahma and a virtuous man 
who sleeps on its summit and dreams of treasure will find 
wealth on waking, whereas an evil-doer who attempts to 
scale it will be seized by demons while yet asleep. There too, 
the trumpeting of the young elephants who disport themselves 
in the Lake Pampa can be heard. O Rama, in that part of the 
hermitage where Matanga lodged them, wild elephants of 
vast size, streaming with crimson ichor, rush to the lake, full 
of ardour, like great clouds ; there they slake their thirst in 
the cool waters, that are limpid, pleasant and extremely 
auspicious to those who bathe in them and which exhale a 
sweet fragrance. Having disported themselves, these elephants 
re-enter the thickets with the bears, panthers and wolves. 
Beholding them, as also the deer of gentle countenance re sembling sapphire, who are harmless and do not fear man, thy 
grief will be assuaged. 
" O Kakutstha, on this mountain, hewn out of the rock 
is a great cavern, difficult of access, covered on all sides with 
delightful fruits, and at the entrance is a great lake of cool 
water filled with every kind of reptile ; there the virtuous 
Sugriva and his companions dwell, though sometimes he 
resides on the summit of the hill." 
Having thus instructed the two princes, Rama and Lakshmana, 
Kabandha, resembling the sun in brilliance, wreathed in 
garlands, illumined the heavens with his splendour. Thereupon 
those two heroes, seeing that blessed One stationed in the sky, 
spoke unto him, saying :— " Go in peace ! " whereto Kabandha 
answered saying : — " Do ye proceed, ye will achieve your 
purpose ! " 
Then Kabandha, having regained his pristine beauty, shining 
in grace and splendour, fixed his gaze on Rama and spoke 
again from the sky, saying : — " Enter into an alliance with 
Sugriva." 
155 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 74 
Rama visits Shabari 
The two princes, following the instructions of Kabandha, 
proceeded along the path to the west leading to Lake Pampa. 
Wending their way, desirous of finding Sugriva, they gazed on 
the many trees laden with flowers and fruit, tasting of nectar, 
growing on the mountain-sides. Passing the night on a 
plateau, those two Descendants of Raghu reached the western 
bank of the Pampa abounding in lotuses and beheld Shabari's 
pleasant retreat. 
Approaching that charming hermitage, shaded on all sides 
by innumerable trees, they beheld that perfected One who, 
seeing them, rose up and with joined palms touched the feet 
of Rama and the prudent Lakshmana and, according to 
tradition, offered water to rinse their mouths and bathe their 
feet. 
Thereupon Rama addressed that female ascetic, fixed in her 
spiritual duty, and said : — " Hast thou overcome all obstacles 
to asceticism, O Thou of gentle speech ? Do thine austerities 
increase daily ? Hast thou subdued thine anger and thy need 
for food ? O Solitary One, hast thou observed thy vows and 
attained inner tranquillity ? Has thine attendance on thy 
Guru borne fruit ? " 
Thus interrogated by Rama, the virtuous Shabari, revered 
by the Gods, extremely aged, standing before him, offered him 
homage and said : — 
" Blessed by thy presence, I have acquired perfection and 
my asceticism is crowned. To-day my birth has borne fruit 
and the service of my Gurus has been fully honoured. To-day 
my pious practices have found fulfilment. O Foremost of 
Men, Greatest of the Celestials, worshipping thee, I shall 
attain the heavenly realm. O Gentle One, O Slayer of thy 
Foes, O Thou who dost confer honour on men, purified by 
thy compassionate regard, I shall, by thy favour, attain the 
imperishable worlds, O Subduer of Thy Foes. 
156 
ARANYA KANDA 
" When thou didst set foot on the Mount Chittrakuta, those 
ascetics I served, ascending celestial cars of incomparable 
splendour, departed to heaven and those great sages, conversant 
with virtue, said to me : — 
" ' Rama will visit thy holy retreat ; do thou receive him 
and Lakshmana with traditional hospitality. On beholding 
him, thou shalt attain the highest sphere from whence none 
returneth.* 
" O Foremost of Men, thus did those blessed ascetics address 
me, and for thee I have gathered the wild fruits of diverse 
kinds that grow on the borders of Lake Pampa." 
Hearing these words, Raghava said to her, who had not been 
left in ignorance by her Gurus concerning the past and the future: — 
" I have heard the truth about the greatness of thy Gurus 
from Danu and now I would fain witness it with mine own 
eyes, if thou judgest it fitting." 
Listening to these words falling from Rama's own lips, 
Shabari, guiding the two brothers to the vast forest, addressed 
them, saying : — 
" O Raghunanda, behold this forest resembling a dark cloud, 
filled with birds and beasts, known as the Matanga Wood. 
Here my Gurus of pure soul sacrificed unto fire, their persons 
consecrated by mantras through which they had purified them, 
thus consecrating the forest and rendering it a holy place. 
Here too is the altar facing the west, where, with hands 
trembling with fatigue, my worshipful preceptors offered 
flowers to their Gods. O Foremost of the Raghus, behold 
this altar of incomparable beauty, which, through the power of 
their penances, still sheds its lustre illumining the four regions. 
Behold also the Seven Seas, drawn here by virtue of their 
thought, since, through fasting and the weight of years, they 
were unable to walk. These robes of bark, left hanging on the 
trees by them at the completion of their ablutions, are still 
wet and the lotuses of azure hue offered by them in worship 
have not faded. 
" Now thou hast seen the forest and hast heard all that thou 
didst desire to know ; I will abandon my body so that I may 
approach those pure-souled ascetics whom I used to wait upon, 
to whom this hermitage belongs and whose servant I am." 
157 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Hearing these pious words, Rama, who was accompanied by 
Lakshmana, experienced great delight and exclaimed : 
" Wonderful it is ! " Thereafter, addressing Shabari of ascetic 
practices, he said : — 
** O Holy One, I have been fully honoured by thee ; now 
repair whither thou wilt and be happy." 
Having received permission from Rama to depart, Shabari, 
wearing matted locks, robes of bark and a black antelope skin, 
cast herself into the fire, thereafter rising into the air like a 
bright flame. 
Adorned with celestial ornaments, wreathed in garlands, 
emitting a divine fragrance, sprinkled with sandal-paste and 
clad in celestial raiment, she appeared exquisite and illumined 
the heavens like a flash of lightning. By virtue of her medita tions she ascended to those sacred abodes where her spiritual 
preceptors, those bigh-souled ascetics, dwelt. 
chapter 75 
Rama reaches the Lake Pampa 
When Shabari had ascended to heaven through the merit of 
her spiritual prowess, Rama with bis brother Lakshmana 
began to ponder over the pious influence of those great ascetics 
and, reflecting within himself on the divine authority of those 
holy men, Raghava said to his brother : — 
" O Friend, I have now visited the retreat of those magnani mous sages of miraculous deeds, where deer and tigers roam, 
together with birds of every kind. O Lakshmana, we have 
performed our ablutions in the sacred waters of these seven 
seas and have offered oblations to our ancestors. Our evil 
karma has thereby been destroyed and prosperity made 
manifest; my heart is filled with peace. Methinks, O Lion 
among Men, that we shall soon meet with good fortune. 
Come, let us walk towards the enchanting Lake Pampa ! The 
Rishyamuka Mountain may be seen in the distance; it is 
158 
ARANYA KANDA 
there that the four great monkeys with Sugriva, Surya's son, 
dwell in constant fear of Bali. I am impatient to see this 
Lion of the Monkey Tribe, Sugriva, for it is he who will 
ascertain where Sita can be found." 
Thus did the heroic Rama speak, and Saumitri answered 
him, saying : — 
" Let us repair thither without delay ; my heart too reaches 
out to that place." Thereupon, issuing from Matanga's 
hermitage, the mighty Rama, Lord of Men, accompanied by 
Lakshmana, proceeded towards lake Pampa. 
On every side he saw innumerable trees in full flower and 
pools where small white cranes nested in the reeds, and peacocks, 
lapwings and woodpeckers, rilling the forest with their cries, as 
also a multitude of other birds. 
Enjoying the trees of varying fragrance and the many ponds, 
Rama, transported with delight, approached one whose waters, 
delicious to the taste, were drawn from the Matanga lake. 
There the two Descendants of Raghu stood in quiet recollection. 
Thereafter, grief once more invading the heart of Raghu, the 
son of Dasaratha, he entered the enchanting lake covered with 
lotuses. 
Adorned on all sides with Tilaka, Ashoka, Punnaga, Vakula 
and Uddalaka trees, which were nourished by its waters, it 
was framed in charming groves and its waves, pure as crystal, 
on which hibiscus blooms floated, flowed over fine sand. Fish 
and turtle abounded there and the banks were embellished by 
trees intertwined with friendly creepers. Kinneras, Uragas, 
Gandharvas, Yakshas and Rakshasas frequented it and diverse 
trees and shrubs cast their shade over it. That lake was 
verily a jewel with its fresh and limpid waters, its lotuses and 
water-lilies lending it a coppery sheen, whilst clumps of 
nymphoae cast silvery reflections and the blue of sapphire 
was added by other flowers. Aravinda and Utpala blooms 
abounded round the lake, which was covered with innumerable 
lotuses, whilst groves of mango in flower lent their shade, and 
peacocks filled it with their cries. 
Rama, the mighty son of Dasaratha, who was accompanied 
by Lakshmana, seeing the Lake Pampa adorned like a bride 
with Tilaka, Bijapura, Vata, Lodhra, Sukladruma, Karavira, 
159 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Punnaga in flower, bushes of Malati and Kunda, Bandira, 
Nichula, Ashoka, Saptaparna, Ketaka, Atknukta and diverse 
other trees of varying perfume, gave expression to his grief : — 
" There stands on the right bank the mountain Rishyamuka, 
abounding in various metals and famed for the variety of its 
trees and flowers, spoken of by Kabandha, where the son of 
the magnanimous Riksharajas, the valiant Sugriva, dwells. 
' O Foremost of Men, seek out the King of the Monkeys ', 
were his words." 
Thereafter, Rama spoke to Lakshmana again, saying : — 
" O Lakshmana, how will Sita be able to live without me?" 
Having spoken thus to Lakshmana, the foremost of the 
Raghus, tormented by his love, which precluded him from 
thinking of aught else, entered the marvellous Lake Pampa, 
having given voice to his sorrow. 
Proceeding slowly, observing the forest, Rama, coming to 
Lake Pampa, surrounded on all sides with enchanting groves, 
filled with a multitude of birds, entered its waters with 
Lakshmana. 
END OF ARANYA KANDA 
BOOK IV. 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
CHAPTER I 
Rama describes the Spring and the Sentiments it evokes in him 
Directing his steps towards Lake Pampa, which was covered 
with lotuses of various kinds, Rama, who was accompanied by 
Lakshmana, his mind troubled, began to lament. Beholding 
that lake, his heart was filled with delight, and under the sway 
of love, he said to the son of Sumitra : — 
" O Lakshmana, how beautiful is the Lake Pampa with its 
pure and limpid waves, its lotuses and flowering water-lilies, 
its many kinds of trees. Oh ! How delightful ! O Saumitri, 
observe the Pampa Woods, how pleasant they are to look upon, 
those magnificent trees resembling crested mountains. I am 
overwhelmed and stricken with grief on recollecting Bharata's 
distress and the abduction of Sita. 
" Though my heart is heavy, yet the Pampa lake is still able 
to charm me, with its ravishing woods luxuriant with every 
kind of blossom and its fresh and delicious waters. The month 
of flowering lotuses1 lends it an extreme beauty ; serpents and 
wild animals frequent it, whilst deer and birds abound. The 
thick grass, of a deep emerald hue, is sprinkled with different 
flowers that have fallen from the trees and resembles a bright 
carpet. On every side the tops of the trees, bending under the 
weight of their blossom, are wholly hidden by the creepers 
with their flowering fronds. 
" O Lakshmana, it is the season of auspicious breezes and 
tender love, the fragrant spring month when flowers and fruit 
are brought to birth on the trees. See how lovely are these 
flowering woods, O Saumitri, showering down a rain of petals, 
like water from the clouds. 
" In the enchanting valleys on the escarpments, innumerable 
trees, shaken by the wind, scatter their blossom on the earth. 
O Lakshmana, see how the breeze, agitating the myriad branches 
1 Lit. Padmas, Utpalas, Jhashas. 
I63 M 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
of the flowering trees, seems to play with the blossom that has 
fallen or is still on the trees. The God of the Wind frolics 
to the accompaniment of the humming of bees and to the song 
of the amorous nightingale, desiring, as it were, to make the 
trees dance. Emerging from the mountain caves, the wind 
gives forth a kind of music, shaking the trees violently from 
side to side, causing the extreme tips of their branches to meet, 
uniting them one with the other. The zephyr with soft caress ing breath, diffusing the perfume of sandalwood, dispels all 
fatigue. 
" Agitated by the wind, these trees seem to add their voices 
to the humming of the bees amidst the soft and fragrant groves. 
" On the enchanting mountain plateaus, the crags, whose 
points touch, resplendent with large trees bearing beautiful 
flowers, sparkle with beauty, and the trees, tossed by the airy 
currents that stir them, their crests covered with blossom and 
crowned with bees, seem about to break into song. 
** See, on every side, the marvellous blossoming of the 
golden Karnikara trees, resembling men robed in silk ! This 
season of Spring, 0 Lakshmana, with its choir of birds of 
every kind revives the pain caused by Sita's absence. In this 
overwhelming grief, pangs of love torment me. The gay 
trilling of the cuckoo tantalizes me ; the joyful Datyuhaka 
bird that sings from the waterfalls of the forest increases my 
pain, O Lakshmana ! Formerly when she heard its voice in 
our hermitage, my beloved, intoxicated with love and happiness, 
would call to me. 
" See how the birds of varied plumage, giving forth every 
kind of note, seek refuge on all sides amongst the trees, bushes 
and creepers ! The females accompanied by the males 
flock together according to their kind and rejoice ; intoxicated 
by the Bhringaraja's exultant cries, they chirrup melodiously. 
Here, in the home of Sita, the assembled birds are made merry 
by the joyous song of the Datyuhaka responding to the cuckoo's 
call. 
" The rustling of the trees rekindles the fire of my love, of 
which the bunches of the Ashoka blooms are the fuel, the 
humming of the bees the crackling, and the buds the golden 
tongues of flame. 
164 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
" This fire of Spring is consuming me ! Nay, far from that 
lady of lovely eyelashes, beautiful looks and gentle speech, I 
cannot survive, O Saumitri ! The season that brings delight 
to the woods is the time she loved, and beyond all, she was 
enamoured of the forest echoing to the call of the cuckoo on 
every side, O Irreproachable Hero ! 
" The tender feelings I bear for my sweet One and the 
delights of Spring that increase them are a burning fire that 
will soon consume me utterly. I shall not live long separated 
from my spouse ; the beauty of these trees increases the pangs 
of my love. Being unable to see Sita any more intensifies my 
anguish, whilst the presence of Spring causes the sweat of 
desire to break forth on me. Thinking of that lady, whose 
eyes resemble a doe's, grief holds me in thrall ; the cruel Spring 
breeze from the woods tortures mc, O Saumitri ! 
" Here and there, peacocks dance, spreading their brilliant 
wings in the breeze, and their tails, decorated with eyes, 
resemble crystal lattices. The females surrounding them are 
intoxicated with desire and this strengthens the love with which 
I am filled. 
" See, O Lakshmana, on the mountain plateau, how the 
peacock dances and how the peahen, her heart intoxicated with 
joy, closely follows him ! He spreads his radiant wings and 
his cries seem to mock my pain, for in the forest his loved one 
has not been carried away by a titan and he can dance in these 
enchanting groves with his tender love. In this month of 
flowers, in Sita's absence, my stay here is unendurable ! 
" See, O Lakshmana, love is found even among lower animals! 
At this moment, the peahen is ardently attracted to the steps 
of the male ; even thus would the large-eyed daughter of 
Janaka follow my steps with renewed love, had she not been 
borne away. 
" O Lakshmana, the flowers that bear down the forest 
branches with their weight in the autumn will produce no 
fruit for me and, though so lovely, will fall rotting to the 
ground with their swarms of bees. 
" The birds at this time, in joyous flight, carolling in love, 
seem to call to one another, invoking deep transports of desire 
in me. If the Spring also reigns where my loved one, Sita, 
165 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALM1KI 
dwells, who has now fallen under the sway of another, she 
will be sharing my ardour. Yet if the Spring has not reached 
that place where she is, how will that dark-eyed lady be able 
to go on living in my absenec ? If this season has not come 
to where my gentle love resides, what will that fair-limbed lady 
do, who has been overpowered by a mighty adversary ? My 
youthful and beloved consort, whose eyes resemble lotus petals 
and who is gentle of speech, will certainly yield up her life at 
the first breath of Spring. In my heart, I feel assured that 
the gentle Sita will not be able to survive separation from me. 
Devotion to Vaidehi invades my entire being and my love is 
wholly centred on her. 
" When I remember my gentle love, this caressing breeze, 
so fresh and cool, carrying the fragrance of flowers, is like a 
burning fire to me. The God of the Wind, who was ever 
welcome when Sita was present, is to-day a source of pain to me. 
In her absence, that bird flying through the air emitting 
cries, the crow now perching on a tree, makes a delightful sound.1 
This winged creature will prove a messenger and bring my 
remembrance to the mind of the large-eyed Vaidehi. 
" Listen, O Lakshmana, to the birds' intoxicating chorus of 
love, as they warble in the flowery crested trees. That bee 
suddenly flying towards the young green shoots of the Tilaka 
tree, blown by the breeze, is like a lover trembling with desire. 
The Ashoka tree, that increases the torment of lovers, rises 
with its plumes of flowers waving in the wind, to tantalize me. 
Look, O Lakshmana, at the flowering mango trees, resembling 
those who are distracted by the pangs of love ! 
" O Saumitri, O Lion among Men ! See how amidst the 
magnificent range of trees that grow on the borders of Lake 
Pampa, the Kinneras wander about on every side ! Observe 
those Nalina flowers of subtle scent, O Lakshmana, gleaming 
on the water like unto the sun about to rise. See the calm 
surface of the Pampa Lake, fragrant with lotus and blue water lilies, frequented by swans and waterfowl, and the stamens of 
the lotus flowers, bright as the dawn, that the bees have scattered 
on the waves. 
1 This refers to a crow cawing at the time of Rama's wedding, indicating 
that he would shortly be separated from her ; now the sound signifies 
KISHKINDHA KA'NDA 
" How the Lake Parapa sparkles ! Waterfowl abound there 
in every season ; how wonderful are its woodland glades ! 
It is enchanting with its herds of elephants and deer, that love 
to come and bathe in it. The water-lilies rocking on the 
breast of the limpid waves, the waters whipped by the impetuous 
wind sparkle with beauty, O Lakshmana. 
" Far from Vaidehi, whose eyes are as large as the petals of 
of the lotus, who ever loved the water-lilies, life has no attraction 
for me. O Perfidious Kama, now I am no longer able to rejoin 
her, thou seekest to evoke in me the memory of that sweet 
lady, whose speech was a thousand times sweeter still; it were 
possible to bear the love I feel for her, if the Spring with its 
flowers and trees did not increase my torment ! Those things 
that enchanted me, when I was with her, in her absence, have 
no further charm for me. On seeing the petals of the lotus 
cup, I say to myself : ' These resemble Sita's eyes ', O Laksh mana. The fragrant breeze, blowing through the stamens of the 
lotus flowers and the trees, resembles her breath. 
" O Saumitri, see how marvellous is the brilliance of the 
flowering trunk of the Karnikara on the ridges of the mountain 
to the right of Lake Pampa. Those ravishing trees with their 
flowers, stripped of leaves, seem to set the mountain ridges on 
fire ; whilst those growing on the banks of the lake, that irrigates 
them, give off a delicate perfume. 
" Malatis, Mallikas, Karaviras and Padmas in flower, 
Ketaki, Sinduvara and Vasanti trees, Matulinga, Purna and 
Kunda bushes on every side; Shiribilva, Madhuka, Vanjula, 
Bakula, Champaka, Tilaka, Nagavriksha, Padmaka, Ashoka 
with their azure flowers, Lodhra, Simhakesara, Pinjara trees 
are seen everywhere. Ankola, Kuranta, Shurnaka, Pari bhadraka, Cuta, Pataii, Kovidara, Mucukunda and Arjuna 
trees spread their blossom on the slope of the mountain. Rakta kurava, Ketaka, Uddalaka, Shirisha, Shingshapa, Dhava, 
Shalmali, Kingshuka, Kurubaka with its red flowers, Tinisha, 
Naktamala, Candaka, Syandana, Hintala, Tilaka and Naga vriksha, these blossoming trees are entwined with flowering 
spiked creepers. 
" See, O Saumitri, how they crowd together on the banks of 
Lake Pampa, their branches waving in the wind ; the creepers 
167 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
seem to be pursuing each other, resembling lovely women 
at play. 
" The breeze passes through the trees from crag to crag, 
from wood to wood. Amongst them, some are in full flower 
and give off a soft fragrance, others, covered with buds, have 
a sombre air. What sweetness ! How pleasant ! What blossom! 
"Amidst these trees on the borders of Lake Pampa, the 
bees seem to be resting in the heart of the flowers, staying a 
moment, then flying off again, quickly alighting elsewhere, 
greedy for nectar. 
" The fortunate earth is heaped with masses of blossom that 
has fallen on the ground, resembling the covering of a couch. 
On the mountain sides unrolls a brilliant carpet of gold and red 
flowers of every kind, O Saumitri. At the end of winter all 
these trees are now in full flower, O Lakshmana. In this 
month of blossom, the plants open, vying with each other, 
and the trees, where the six-legged insects hum, seem to 
challenge one another, manifesting a great brilliance, their 
branches crowned with flowers. 
" The Karandava bird plunging into the limpid waves, dis porting itself with its mate, seems in some way to inspire love. 
Like that of the Mandakini, the beauty of the Lake Pampa is 
enchanting ; its perfections are famed throughout the world 
and, in proximity, ravish the heart. 
" If I might find my gentle Love once again, and we could 
take up our abode here, I should not even covet India's realm 
or regret Ayodhya. Here, on these charming slopes, I should 
sport with her and neither my thoughts nor desires would 
lead me away. 
" In the absence of my beloved, the trees of these woods, 
wholly covered with every kind of flower, almost deprive me 
of my reason. 
" Gaze on this lake of limpid waters, O Saumitri, which is 
covered with lotuses, frequented by the Chakravaka bird, the 
abode of Karandavas, abounding in pelicans, herons and wild 
beasts and re-echoing to the warbling of birds; verily Lake 
Pampa is a paradise ! The myriad birds with their delightful 
antics and the memory of that youthful woman, my beloved, 
whose face shines like the moon, whose eyes resemble lotuses, 
168 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
all inflame my desire. I, who am separated from Sita, whose 
eyes resemble the doe's and the gazelle's, on seeing them dis porting themselves there, am troubled, as it were. 
" On that pleasant hillside, filled with flocks of birds, intoxi cated with love, might I but see my gentle One, I should be 
content. O Saumitri, I should certainly live anew if Sita of 
slender waist were inhaling the auspicious air of Lake Pampa 
at my side. Fortunate is he, O Lakshmana, who drinks 
that pleasant air from the woods of Lake Pampa that carries 
the fragrance of the lotus and dispels all grief. 
" How is that youthful woman, whose eyes resemble lotus 
petals, the beloved daughter of Janaka, able to bear the exist ence of a slave ? What shall I say to that virtuous king, the 
faithful Janaka, when, in the presence of the people, he asks 
me if all is well with Sita ? 
" She who followed me to the dreary forest whither my father 
had banished me, that Sita, fixed in her duty, where is she, 
my beloved, now ? Separated from her, how, in mine adversity, 
O Lakshmana, shall I be able to endure life ? I am losing 
my reason! When shall I hear the incomparable voice of 
Vaidehi again ? Though she found nought but misfortune in 
the forest, yet that youthful woman, in her tenderness, con versed sweetly with me, who was consumed with love, as if 
she had ceased to be unhappy and was full of joy. How shall 
I, in Ayodhya, reply to Kaushalya, O Prince, when that vener able queen asks me : ' Where is my daughter-in-law and what 
has befallen her ? ' 
" O Lakshmana, return and seek out Bharata, our devoted 
brother; as for me, I can no longer continue living without 
the daughter of Janaka." 
Thus did the magnanimous Rama lament, as if deprived of 
support, and his brother, Lakshmana, in judicious and measured 
words, answered him, saying : — " O Rama, summon up thy 
courage and be happy, do not grieve, O Thou, the Best of Men. 
Those in thy condition have nothing with which to reproach 
themselves and should not give way to despair. Calling to 
remembrance the grief caused by separation from that being 
who is dear to thee, banish all excessive attachment. In 
proximity to intense heat, even a damp net catches fire. Though 
169 
THE RAMAYANA OF V'A L M I"; K I 
be descend into hell or yet lower, Ravana will in no way 
survive his deed, O Beloved Rama. Let us first seek out this 
wicked demon ; either he shall yield up Sita or he is lost. 
Should Ravana descend into the womb of Diti1 with Sita, 
I shall slay him if he does not restore her to thee. Return 
to thy normal state, My Noble Friend, and throw off these 
mournful thoughts. Assuredly no success is gained by those 
who abandon their undertakings without making due efforts. 
Exertion is a powerful weapon, O Lord, there is no power 
superior to it. With effort, nothing is impossible in this 
world. Resolute men do not fail in their pursuits. By our 
efforts alone we shall recover Janaki. Do not permit thyself 
to be dominated by thy love or thy grief; cast it behind thee. 
Hast thou perchance forgotten the greatness of thy soul, the 
fixity of thy purpose and character ? " 
Thus spurred on by Lakshmana, Rama, who had allowed 
himself to be overcome by sorrow, banished his grief and 
distraction and regained his valour. 
Calm and brave beyond imagining, Rama crossed the Pampa 
that was full of charm, enchanting with its trees of waving 
branches. When he had explored the whole forest with its 
waterfalls and ravines, the magnanimous Rama, agitated and 
overcome with grief, set out with Lakshmana, and with the 
joyous gait of an elephant intoxicated with Mada juice, the 
intrepid and magnanimous Saumitri, with rapid strides went 
on his way serenely, consoling Rama by his fidelity and valour. 
As they neared the vicinity of Rishyamuka, the King of the 
Monkeys observed those heroes of unusual aspect and, despite 
his courage, trembled but made no move towards them. That 
magnanimous monkey, who walked with the dignity of an 
elephant, seeing those two brothers advancing, was filled with 
extreme apprehension and became distracted with fear. 
In their terror at the sight of Rama and Lakshmana, those 
monkeys concealed themselves in that pleasant solitude, the 
refuge of the Deer of the Trees.8 
1 The bowels of the earth. 
* Monkeys. 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
CHAPTER 2 
Sugriva sends Hanuman to interview Rama 
Beholding those two illustrious brothers, Rama and Laksbmana, 
bearing great swords in their hands, Sugriva grew anxious and, 
with a beating heart, glancing round on every side, could find 
no place in which to take refuge. Seeing those two heroes, 
he moved about restlessly from place to place and, in his terror, 
felt himself about to swoon. Exceedingly perturbed, the 
virtuous Sugriva with his companions began to ponder on the 
varying aspects of the situation and that Chief of the Monkey 
Tribe, pointing out those two warriors, Rama and Lakshmana, 
to his ministers, said : — 
" Without doubt, Bali has sent these two heroes to this wood, 
which is inaccessible to him, and they, assuming robes of bark, 
have come hither and have penetrated this stronghold.'* 
Then those counsellors of Sugriva, perceiving the two 
skilful archers, sped away from that ridge to a higher crest, 
slipping off hurriedly behind their leader and thereafter they 
encircled that King of the Forest Dwellers. In close formation, 
they leapt from crag to crag, causing the rocks to tremble with 
their bounds. Jumping with extreme force, they broke down 
the flowering trees growing in that altitude and those amazing 
monkeys, leaping in every direction on that great mountain, 
struck terror in the hearts of the deer, the wild cats and the 
tigers. 
Thereafter, the counsellors of Sugriva, assembling on that 
Indra of mountains, gathered round their sovereign with 
joined palms, and the eloquent Hanuman addressed Sugriva, 
who in his terror suspected some project of his brother's to be 
afoot, saying : — 
" Let all banish fear of Bali ! There is nothing to inspire 
terror on this, the highest of mountains. I do not see any 
sign here of that cruel Bali of evil aspect, who has filled thee 
171 
THE RAMAYAKA OF VALMIKI 
with apprehension and caused thy flight, O Bull among 
Monkeys. That cunning creature whom thou fearest, thy 
wicked elder brother, is not here, O Friend : I see no cause for 
thine apprehension. It is evident, O Plavamgama, that thy 
simian nature is asserting itself, since, by giving way to dis traction of mind, thou art not able to see clearly. Thou art 
intelligent, experienced, able to read the expression of others 
and fully prepared for any eventuality, but a prince who gives 
way to agitation is not able to forestall any." 
Hearing Hanuman's pregnant utterance, Sugriva answered 
him with greater calm saying : — 
" Seeing those two long-armed warriors of large eyes, armed 
with bows and swords, resembling the offspring of the Gods, 
who would not be afraid ? I deem these two powerful heroes 
to be the messengers of Bali. Kings have many friends, and 
I do not feel able to trust them. Those who are cautious 
invariably find the weak spot in those who are over-confident. 
Bali is crafty in every enterprise. Those monarchs who are 
well-informed are able to overcome their enemies and should 
spy out their actions with the help of ordinary men. 
" Go, O Plavamgama, in the guise of a common man and 
find out the intentions of these two strangers. Study their 
gestures, their manners and their speech j observe their 
attitude and how they are disposed. 
" By praise and repeated courtesies inspire them with 
confidence. Interrogate those two archers in my name, O 
Bull amongst Monkeys, and enquire of them for what reason 
they have come to these woods. Discover if their purpose 
be honest, O Plavamgama; their speech and manner will 
betray them if they are ill-intentioned." 
Thus commanded by Sugriva, the Son of Maruta prepared 
to seek out Rama and Lakshmana. 
His master, through extreme fear, having rendered himself 
unapproachable, the monkey Hanuman of noble attributes, 
listening to his words with respect, answered : " Be it so ! " 
and went forth to meet the mighty Rama and Lakshmana 
who accompanied him. 
172 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
CHAPTER 3 
Hanuman's Meeting with Rama 
At the command of the magnanimous Sugriva, Hanuman, 
with one bound, left the Mountain Rishyamuka and placed 
himself in the path of the two Raghavas. 
Discarding his monkey form, Hanuman, the son of Maruta, 
by the power of illusion, assumed the guise of a wandering 
monk and, in gentle and pleasing tones, addressed those two 
brothers with humility, paying obeisance to them. 
Approaching those two heroes, that Foremost of Monkeys 
praised them as they deserved, offering them every courtesy 
and in accord with Sugriva's wish spoke graciously to them, 
saying : — 
" O Ascetics of renowned penance, who are full of faith and 
valour and who resemble the Rishis and the Gods, why have 
you come to this region, sowing fear amongst the herds of deer 
and other denizens of the forest, surveying the trees on every 
side that grow on the borders of Pampa, that lake of sparkling 
waves, the splendour of which you enhance with your radiance, 
O Heroes of Great Daring ? 
" O Valiant Strangers, who are you, whose skin gleams like 
gold and who are clad in robes of bark, possessing strong arms, 
you who are sighing deeply and whose sight inspires fear in all 
beings ? You have the air of lions or warriors who are full of 
courage and heroism, armed as you are with bows, resembling 
Indra's, the Destroyers of your Foes ? 
" Full of majesty and beauty, mighty as great bulls, your 
arms resembling the trunks of elephants, radiant, the first 
among men, youthful, illumining the king of the mountains with 
your effulgence, you who are worthy of ruling kingdoms and 
like unto the Gods, what purpose brings you here ? O Heroes, 
whose eyes are as large as lotus petals, who wear your matted 
locks coiled like crowns on your heads, who resemble each 
173 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
other, have you come hither from the celestial region ? Verily 
the sun and moon have descended to earth of their own free 
will. O Broad-chested Warriors, ye who are men, yet nave 
the aspect of divine beings, whose shoulders are like unto a 
lion's, who are endowed with great strength and resemble two 
bulls intoxicated with desire, whose large and massive arms 
look like clubs that should be adorned with every kind of 
ornament, yet bear none, it seems that you are both worthy 
of ruling the whole earth, whose decorations are the Vindhya 
and Mem mountains with their lakes and forests. How 
beautiful arc your two shining bows, glistening with perfumed 
paste, covered with gold and shining like the mace of Indra ; 
the two quivers also, rilled with sharp death-dealing and 
formidable arrows resembling hissing snakes ; your two 
swords of immense length and size, encrusted with fine gold 
that gleam like serpents that have just cast their slough ! But 
why do ye not answer me ? 
" Sugriva is the name of that virtuous King of the Monkeys, 
that hero banished by his brother, who roams the earth in 
great distress. I have come here under the orders of that 
magnanimous one, the Chief of the Great Monkeys. The 
illustrious Sugriva desires your friendship. Know me to be 
his minister, a monkey, the son of Pavana, ranging where I 
please and coming here under the guise of a wandering monk 
from the Rishyamuka Mountain in order to please him." 
Having addressed those two heroes, Rama and Lakshmana, 
in discreet and courteous terms, Hanuman fell silent and hearing 
that speech, the blessed Rama, delighted, addressed Lakshmana 
who stood beside him, saying : — 
" This is the minister of the King of the Monkeys, the 
magnanimous Sugriva, whom I seek. O Saumitri, answer 
Sugriva's counsellor who is eloquent and warm-hearted and 
the subduer of his foes in courteous terms. Only one versed 
in the Rig- Veda and, who is conversant with the Yajur and the 
Sama Vedas, would speak thus. He has studied grammar 
thoroughly, and though he has spoken at length, it has been 
void of error. I see naught to offend, either in his mouth, 
his eyes, his brow, limbs, or attitude. His speech is neither 
lacking in fulness, depth, assurance or distinction ; his voice 
174 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
issues from his breast in clear modulated tones. He expresses 
himself with admirable felicity without any hesitation ; his 
tone is harmonious and moves the heart agreeably. What foe, 
having drawn his sword, would not be disarmed by the charm 
of that voice that enunciates each syllable so perfectly. O 
Irreproachable Prince, the king who employs messengers 
gifted with such talent is certain to succeed in all his under takings, since they are enhanced at the very outset, by such 
eloquence." 
On this, Saumitri addressed that eloquent minister of 
Sugriva's in well-chosen words, saying : — " O Sage, we have 
been told of the great attributes of Sugriva and are at this 
moment looking for that King of the Monkeys. That which 
he commands we will carry out on thine instructions, O 
Excellent Hanuman." 
When he heard this gracious speech, that monkey, born of 
Pavana, who wished nothing more than that Sugriva should 
triumph, resolved to bring about a friendly alliance between 
Rama and his master. 
CHAPTER 4 
Hanuman bears Rama and Lakshmana into the presence of Sugriva 
Listening to Lakshmana's courteous words and marking the 
feeling of goodwill towards his master, Hanuman, deeming 
Rama would be willing to assist him, joyfully reflected that 
Sugriva's triumph was already assured. 
He thought : " Undoubtedly the magnanimous Sugriva will 
not fail to regain his kingdom, for here is one who will enable 
him to accomplish his design." 
Then the wholly delighted and eloquent Hanuman, the 
Foremost of Monkeys, said to Rama: — "What brings thee 
with thy younger brother to this perilous and inaccessible 
forest ? " 
On this enquiry, Lakshmana, prompted by his brother, 
related the history of Rama, the son of Dasaratha, to him. 
175 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
" There was a king named Dasaratha, who was illustrious, 
fixed in his duty and, according to the law, the protector of 
the four castes. Without a foe, he himself hating none, he 
appeared to all living beings to be a second Brahma. 
" The firstborn son of Dasaratha, who possessed every 
excellent quality, the refuge of all, endowed with royal virtues 
and of great majesty, was banished from his dominion and 
obedient to the behests of his sire, has come to dwell in the 
forest. Submitting to the paternal decree, he was followed 
by his consort, Sita, as the glorious sun by the sunset glow 
at evening. 
" My name is Lakshmana. I, who am inferior to him in 
every respect, am his brother and accompany him as his 
servant. This dutiful prince, who is ever mindful of what 
should be done, is extremely learned and this hero, who spends 
his life in promoting the welfare of all beings, who is worthy 
of happiness and honour, deprived of supreme power, passes 
his days in the forest. A titan, who was able to change his 
form at will, carried off his consort, she being alone, and her 
abductor is unknown to us. 
" The son of Diti, Danu, who, through a curse, had been 
forced to assume the form of a titan, imparted the name of 
Sugriva, the King of the Monkeys, to us. Now I have 
answered thine enquiries fully in all sincerity ; Rama and I 
both seek the help of Sugriva. The distributor of all 
wealth, he, who has reached the peak of glory and was formerly 
the guardian of the worlds, has come to seek Sugriva's protection. 
The son of that instructor of his people, who was devoted to 
his duty, of whom Sita was the daughter-in-law, Rama, seeks 
the protection of Sugriva. The strong defender of the whole 
universe, that was formerly his highway, my Guru Rama, 
whom thou seest here, has come to seek refuge with Sugriva. 
He, under whose compassion all beings rest, Rama, has come 
to appeal to the goodwill of that King of the Monkeys. It is 
the eldest son of King Dasaratha, who was endowed with 
every good attribute and on this earth constantly showered 
honours on monarchs, Rama, renowned in the Three Worlds, 
who now seeks refuge in Sugriva, Lord of the Monkeys. 
Rama, a victim to grief, overwhelmed with affliction, has come 
i76 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
as a suppliant ! It is for Sugriva with the leaders of the monkey 
tribes to show favour to him." 
Hearing Lakshrnana, uttering this appeal, his tears flowing 
the while, Hanuman graciously replied : — 
" Such suppliants, endowed with wisdom, who have mastered 
their anger and other passions and whose fortune has led 
them to his presence, arc worthy to be brought before that 
Indra of Monkeys. He too is exiled from his kingdom and 
the object of his brother's enmity, who has carried off his 
consort and, after maltreating him cruelly, forced him to flee 
trembling to the forest. That offspring of Surya, Sugriva, 
will form a pact of friendship with you, and I shall accompany 
him in his search for Sita." 
Having spoken thus in a gentle and kindly tone, Hanuman 
said to Raghava in friendly accents: — "Let us seek out 
Sugriva." 
At these words, the righteous Lakshrnana bowed courteously 
to him and addressed the virtuous Raghava, saying : — 
" What this monkey, born of the Wind-God, has gladly 
told us, his master will carry out ; it is here that thy purpose 
will find fulfilment, O Rama. Goodness is painted on his 
countenance ; he speaks cheerfully and his words ring true." 
Then that extremely intelligent son of Maruta, Hanuman, 
went away, taking the two heroes, the descendants of Raghu, 
with him. Abandoning the guise of a mendicant and assum ing the form of a monkey, that great ape, taking those two 
warriors on his shoulders, departed. 
Thereafter, that intelligent son of Pavana, who was renowned 
among the monkeys and endowed with great prowess, delighted 
to have accomplished his design, scaled the mountain with 
immense bounds taking Rama and Lakshrnana with him. 
CHAPTER 5 
The Alliance of Rama and Sugriva 
From the Rishyamuka mountain, Hanuman bounded to the 
Mt. Malaya and presenting the two valiant descendants of 
Raghu to Sugriva, said : — 
177 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
" This is Rama, O Great and Wise King, who has come 
here with Lakshmana, his brother ; this true hero, born in the 
dynasty of Ikshwaku, is the son of King Dasaratha. 
" Fixed in his duty, he is carrying out the behests of his 
sire, that great king who, gratifying the Deity of Fire, Agni, 
with the Rajasuya and Ashwamedha sacrifices, at those times 
distributed hundreds and thousands of cows in charity. 
" On account of a woman, his son, Rama, who is present 
here, was exiled to the forest and, while that magnanimous 
hero was dwelling there, practising asceticism, Ravana carried 
off his consort ; he now seeks thy protection. 
'* These two brothers, Rama and Lakshmana, solicit thy 
friendship ; do thou receive these heroes, worthy of homage, 
with honour ! " 
Hearing these words of Hanuman, Sugriva, the King of the 
Monkeys, who had now become easy of access, said to Rama: — 
" This is a great fortune and the greatest of gains for me 
O Lord, that thou desirest to ally thyself in friendship with me, 
who am one of the Monkey Tribe. Should that friendship 
find favour with thee, then here is my hand, take it into thine 
and let us bind ourselves fast with a vow." 
Hearing Sugriva's sweet words, Rama with a joyful heart 
clasped his hand and, happy in the thought of the alliance they 
were about to conclude, embraced him warmly. 
Then Hanuman, the Subduer of his Foes, who had put off 
his monk's guise, assuming his own shape, kindled a fire by 
rubbing two pieces of wood together. The fire being lit and 
flowers cast into it, thus preparing it, he placed it between 
them,1 full of joy and devotion. 
Going round it they both worshipped the fire and thus 
Sugriva and Rama were united in friendship. Whereupon the 
hearts of the monkey and Rama were merry and, gazing upon 
each other, they were unable to have their fill. 
" Thou art now the friend of my heart in joy and pain ! 
We are one ! " Thus spoke Sugriva in his satisfaction, as also 
Rama, and breaking off a branch from a Sala tree adorned with 
leaves and covered with flowers, Sugriva laid it down as it 
were a carpet and with Rama sat down upon it, whilst the 
1 The fire apparently bciiiR in a brazier. 
i78 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
delighted Hanuman, born of Maruta, in his turn, offered 
Lakshmana a branch of blossoming sandalwood. 
Thereafter, full of happiness, Sugriva, his eyes wide with 
delight, said to Rama in sweet and gentle tones : — 
" Cruelly persecuted, O Rama, I came hither in great fear, 
my consort having been wrested from me, and, in deep distress, 
I took refuge in this inaccessible part of the forest, where 
I now dwell, my mind distracted with terror. 
" My brother oppresses me and is mine enemy, O Rama, 
O Great Hero ; do thou deliver me from the fear which Bali 
inspires in me ! Act, O Kakutstha, in such a way that my 
courage may be restored." 
At these words, the illustrious and virtuous Rama, a lover 
of justice, smiling, answered Sugriva, saying : — 
" I know well that the fruit of friendship is mutual aid, 
O Great Monkey ! I shall slay that Bali, who has carried off 
thy consort ! These pointed shafts that thou perceivest, these 
arrows bright as the sun, fly straight to their target. Decorated 
with heron's feathers and resembling Indra's thunderbolt, 
skilfully wrought, their points sharpened, resembling provoked 
serpents, they will pierce that perverse wretch with force. 
To-day thou shalt see Bali fall on the earth like a cleft mountain 
struck by these pointed darts, resembling venomous snakes." 
Encouraged by Rama's words, Sugriva, overjoyed, spoke 
again, saying : — " May I by thy grace, O Valiant Lion among 
Men, regain my consort and my kingdom. O King, do thou 
restrain my wicked elder brother from harming me hereafter." 
At the moment when Sugriva and Rama concluded their 
alliance, Sita's left eye, resembling a lotus, twitched,1 as also 
did that of the Indra of Monkeys, which resembled gold, and 
that of the titan, Ravana, which was like a flame. 
1 A foreshowing of coming events. 
179 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 6 
Sugriva shows Rama Sita's Cloak and Jewels 
In his joy, Sugriva addressed Raghava, the delight of the 
House of Raghu, once again, saying : " I have learnt thine 
history from my servant, the best of counsellors, Hanuman, 
and why thou hast come to these sylvan solitudes, where thou 
residest with thy brother Lakshmana. 
" Borne away by a titan, thy consort, Maithili, the daughter 
of Janaka, is grieving far from thee and the sagacious Lakshmana. 
That titan seeking an opportunity to do thee mischief, 
having slain the .vulture, Jatayu, carried off thy consort, thus 
rendering thee unhappy. Thou shalt soon be freed from the 
sorrow that the abduction of thy loved one causes thee. 
" Whether she is to be found in heaven or hell, I shall seek 
out that lady and bring her back to thee, O Conqueror of 
Thine Enemies ! Know well, I speak truly, O Raghava. Sita 
is not destined to be the food of gods or titans ; thy consort 
will prove to be a poisoned dish to them ! 
" Banish thy grief, I will bring thy dear one back to thee. 
As I surmised, it was undoubtedly Sita that I saw when that 
titan of cruel deeds bore her away. She was crying : ' O 
Rama ! O Lakshmana ! * in a pitiful voice and struggling in 
Ravana's arms, like the female of the Serpent King. 
" Seeing me with my five companions standing on the 
summit of the mountain, she dropped her cloak and magnificent 
jewels, which we collected and preserved, O Rama. I will 
bring them to thee and thou wilt perchance be able to call them 
to remembrance." 
On this, Rama answered Sugriva in all affection and said: — 
" Go quickly and bring them to me here without delay, O 
Friend ! " 
At these words, Sugriva, intent on pleasing Rama, ran in 
all haste to a deep cave in the mountain, and seizing the cloak 
and jewels, that monkey showed them to Rama, saying: — 
" These are they, O Raghava ! " 
1 80 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
Then Rama, taking the raiment and the sparkling jewels, 
found his eyes to be misty with tears, as the moon is veiled 
in cloud, tears that in his affection for Sita fell in torrents, 
and, losing his composure, he fell to the earth, sobbing : 
" O My Dear One ! " 
Pressing the precious jewels to his breast, heaving deep sighs 
like the furious hissing of a snake in its bole, his eyes streaming 
with tears, perceiving Lakshmana at his side, he began to 
lament bitterly, saying : — 
" O Lakshmana, behold Vaidehi's cloak and jewels, which, 
while being carried away, she allowed to fall on the earth ; 
without doubt, it was on this grassy slope that Sita, while 
being borne away, scattered her ornaments, their condition 
confirms it." 
Hearing Rama's words, Lakshmana said : — " I do not 
recognize the bracelets or earrings, but I know the anklets, 
for I worshipped her feet alone."1 
Then Rama said to Sugriva : — " In what place didst thou 
behold Vaidehi, my chaste spouse, dearer to me than life 
itself ? What hideous titan bore her away ? Where does that 
monster dwell, who has plunged me in this mourning ? Having 
carried Sita away and kindled my wrath, he has forfeited his 
life and opened the portals of death. Say, who is this titan, 
who, in the forest, has by craft borne away my tender consort? 
O Chief of the Monkeys, to-day I shall dispatch him to the 
region of death." 
CHAPTER 7 
Sugriva consoles Rama 
Thus, in his distress, did Rama speak, and the monkey, 
Sugriva, with joined palms, weeping, his voice shaken with 
sobs, answered him, saying : — 
" Indeed I do not know where that wicked titan dwells, 
nor his strength, nor the extent of his valour, nor the tribe to 
which that vile monster belongs, but, O Subduer of Thy Foes, 
I beg thee in all sincerity to master thy grief. 
1 Implying that lie never raised his eyes above her feet. 
181 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI . 
" By mine efforts, I shall succeed in restoring Maithili to 
thee ! By slaying Ravana and his entire house and mani festing my personal courage to the uttermost, I shall act in 
such a way that thou wilt be happy 'ere long. Thou hast 
yielded to despair sufficiently, now exhibit thy native resolution! 
Men like thee should not give way to despondency ! 
" I too suffer greatly on account of separation from my 
consort, but I do not despair like thee, nor have I lost courage. 
Though but a common monkey, I do not indulge in complaint. 
How much less shouldst thou do so, O Magnanimous Hero, 
thou who art wise, valiant and illustrious ! 
" Thou shouldst resolutely restrain the tears that fall .; it 
becometh thee not to lose patience, that quality that distin guishes men of nobility. 
" A brave man has recourse to reason and does not allow 
himself to be moved either in adversity, consequent on separa tion from relatives, or on the loss of possessions, or at the 
time of death. But the man who is lacking in courage and 
gives way to despair inevitably succumbs to bis grief, like an 
overloaded ship in the water. 
" Bowing low before thee with joined palms, I beseech thee 
to summon up all thy fortitude and not yield to misery. Those 
who permit themselves to be overcome by grief never succeed, 
and their strength is decreased ; do not therefore give thyself 
up to sorrow. 
" He who is overwhelmed by despair is in danger. Banish 
thy sorrow, O Indra among Men, and revive thy courage; 
let it be fully restored ! I speak to thee for thine own good, 
as a friend; I do not wish to instruct thee. Therefore for our 
friendship's sake, do not yield thyself up to grief." 
Tenderly consoled by Sugriva, Rama wiped his face, which 
was wet with tears, with the corner of bis tunic and, returning 
to his normal state as a result of Sugriva's words, the Lord 
Kakutstha, embracing him, said : — 
" O Sugriva, thou dost fulfil the role of a devoted friend, 
that of being of service with dignity. O Friend, see how, 
through thy good counsel, I have become myself again. It is 
not easy to find such an ally, who is suffering the same adversity; 
therefore exert thyself to find Maithili and the cruel titan, 
182 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
that perverse Ravana, and tell me frankly what I should do. 
Thou art a rich field that the rains have visited ; everything 
will succeed with thee. Further, the words I recently pro nounced1 with confidence, O Tiger among Monkeys, will 
without doubt come to pass. Never have I uttered a falsehood, 
nor shall I ever do so. I swear by the truth, that what I have 
said will come to pass 1 " 
Hearing the words of that King of Men, the wise leader of 
the valiant monkeys felt in his heart that his purpose was 
accomplished. 
CHAPTER 8 
Sugriva implores Rama to kelp him against Bali 
Gratified on hearing these words, Sugriva joyfully addressed 
the elder brother of Lakshmana in this wise : — 
" Undoubtedly I am favoured by the Gods, since I have a 
virtuous friend, full of great qualities, such as thou ! With 
thy help, O Irreproachable One, it would be possible for me 
even to conquer the celestial realm, how much more regain 
my kingdom, O Lord ! I am the object of reverence to my 
friends and kinsmen, O Rama, since, witnessed by the sacred 
fire, I have formed an alliance with thee ! O Descendant of 
the House of Raghu, thou wilt soon find me worthy of thy 
friendship, but it does not become me to speak of mine own 
good qualities. It is in great heroes such as thou, masters 
of themselves, that affection, like true courage, remains fixed, 
O Best of Well-bora Men ! Silver, gold and precious gems 
are shared amongst friends as belonging to either; rich or 
poor, happy or wretched, destitute or gifted with good qualities, 
a friend is ever a friend. Good fortune, prosperity or country, 
O Irreproachable Hero, are all sacrificed for the sake of a 
friend ; only devotion to him matters." 
" True indeed," replied the blessed Rama to the handsome 
Sugriva, in the presence of Lakshmana, who equalled Vasava 
in wisdom. 
1 Concerning Bali. 
183 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
The following day, Sugriva, seeing Rama standing by the 
valiant Lakshmana, scanned the forest hurriedly and, observing 
a Sala tree at no great distance, covered with flowers and heavy 
with luxuriant foliage, in which bees were humming, tore off 
a magnificent leafy branch, and spreading it on the ground 
sat down on it with Rama. 
Seeing the two thus installed, Hanuman, in his turn, break ing off a branch of a Sala tree, invited the self-effacing Lakshmana 
to take his place there. 
Beholding Rama seated at his ease on that lofty mountain, 
covered with flowering Sala trees, radiating serenity like a 
peaceful lake, Sugriva, in his delight, in soft and gentle tones, 
leaning towards his friend who was manifesting extreme 
joy, said to him in accents trembling with emotion : — 
" Harassed by my brother, my declared enemy, O Rama, 
fear of Bali preys on my mind. O Thou who art the refuge 
of the world, I am without a defender, grant me thy support ! " 
Hearing these words, the illustrious and virtuous Rama, 
fixed in his duty, smiling, answered Sugriva, saying : — 
"Administering relief is the fruit of friendship, harming 
others that of enmity ! This very day, I shall slay the abductor 
of thy consort. Here are my winged shafts and fiery arrows, 
O Fortunate One, whose hafts, inlaid with gold, resembling 
Mahendra's thunder-bolt, have come from the forest of 
Karttikeya and are adorned with heron's plumes. Their 
smooth joints and sharp points lend them the appearance of 
angry snakes. Thou shalt see that enemy, thy brother called 
Bali, tainted with evil deeds, struck down with these arrows, 
like a mountain crumbling into dust." 
Hearing Rama's words, Sugriva, the leader of the monkey 
army, felt an inexpressible joy. " Excellent ! Excellent ! ", 
he cried. " O Rama, I have been overwhelmed with distress 
and thou art the refuge of the afflicted. Knowing thee to be 
mine ally, I have poured out my sorrow on thy breast. Having 
clasped thy hand in mine, witnessed by the fire, thou hast 
become the most valued friend of my life ; by the truth I 
swear it. I have taken thee as my friend and speak to thee in 
confidence. The misfortune that has overtaken me constantly 
gnaws at my heart." 
184 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
Thus spoke Sugriva, his eyes brimming, his voice strangled 
with sobs, unable to continue. Then, stemming the stream of 
his tears, that flowed like a raging torrent, Sugriva, in Rama's 
presence, mastering himself in an instant and, stifling his sobs, 
wiped his beautiful eyes. Thereafter, that illustrious monkey 
once again addressed Raghava, saying : — 
" O Rama, formerly Bali, overwhelming me with insults, 
banished me from the kingdom. Seizing my consort, dearer 
to me than life itself, he bound my friends in chains. Then that 
perverse wretch sought to destroy me, O Rama, and often the 
monkeys themselves were bribed to that end, but I slew them. 
Full of apprehension on seeing thee, O Rama, I did not venture 
to go out to meet thee, being a prey to fear and yet in dread. 
" These monkeys with Hanuman as their leader are my sole 
companions ; it is due to them that I am still alive, though the 
situation is grave. These loyal monkeys surround and protect 
me, accompanying me on all my journeys, remaining with me 
wherever I decide to stay. 
" O Rama, of what use is it to speak further ? My elder 
brother, Bali, distinguished for his cruelty, is mine adversary. 
If he dies, at that very moment my misfortunes will be at an 
end. My happiness, nay, my very life, depends on his destruc tion. This is the only remedy for my woes. I tell thee this 
while yet overcome with grief; happy or unhappy, a friend 
is ever the refuge of a friend ! " 
At these words, Rama enquired of Sugriva, saying : — " I 
wish to know the source of this hostility, tell me the cause of 
your mutual enmity. When the reason for thine hatred is 
known to me, O Monkey, I will concern myself with thy relief. 
I shall reflect carefully on the matter and on its strength and 
weakness. Great is mine indignation to learn of thine ill treatment, my heart beats faster, as in the rainy season the 
river's flow is augmented. Speak with serene confidence while 
I string my bow, and know that when I loose my shaft to 
strike thine adversary, he is already slain." 
Hearing the speech of the magnanimous Kakutstha, Sugriva 
and his counsellors were highly gratified, and with a cheerful 
countenance Sugriva began to relate the real cause of his 
enmity with Bali to the elder brother of Lakshmana. 
185 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 9 
The Story of Bali and Mayavi 
" Bah is the name of my elder brother, the Scourge of his 
Foes. He was ever held in great esteem by my father and mother, 
and I, also, loved him. When his father died, he being the 
elder, the ministers, who thought highly of him, installed him 
as King of the Monkeys. During his rule over that immense 
empire of his ancestors, I lived in constant subjection to him, 
as one of his servants. On account of a woman, a great quarrel 
arose between Mayavi, the illustrious elder son of Dundubhi 
and Bali. One night, whilst others slept, Mayavi approached 
the gates of Kishkindha, roaring with anger and challenged 
Bah to fight. Roused from deep sleep by those formidable 
cries, my brother, unable to contain himself, went forth immedi ately, advancing in fury on that powerful titan in order to kill 
him. His wives and I tried to restrain him and I threw 
myself at his feet, but he repelled us all and went forth full of 
valour. 
"Then, out of devotion, I followed him. Seeing my brother 
and me following within a short distance, the titan, in fear, fled 
in all haste. Struck with terror he ran on, but we ran even 
faster. The moon, that had risen, flooded the path with its 
light. Hidden by grass, a large hole in the ground came into 
view and the titan threw himself into it precipitately. We 
reached the edge and halted. Bali, who was overcome with 
rage, his senses perturbed, said to me : — 
" ' O Sugriva, remain here, without leaving the mouth of the 
cave, while I enter in order to engage the enemy and slay him! * 
" Hearing these words I besought that Destroyer of his Foes 
to go no further but he, under the threat of a curse, told me 
not to move from there and disappeared into the cavern. 
'* After his entry into the cave, a whole year elapsed and I 
remained at my post without ; I imagined him to be dead and 
186 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
in my affection for him was deeply distressed and a prey to 
fearful presentiments, reflecting : ' I shall not see my brother 
again.' 
" Then, for a long time, blood mixed with foam flowed from 
the cave and the roaring of the titan reached my ears, but I 
did not hear the cries of triumph that my elder brother emitted 
in the struggle. Thereafter on account of the various signs, 
I went away, thinking that my brother was dead, but first 
I blocked up the mouth of the cave with a rock as large as a 
mountain. O My Friend, overcome by sorrow, I offered up 
the ceremonial water for my brother and returned to Kishkindha. 
" Despite mine efforts to keep the matter secret, the ministers 
learnt of it and having taken counsel together, they installed 
me as sovereign. I ruled the empire with justice, O Rama. 
In the meantime Bali, having slain his enemy, the titan, returned. 
Seeing me installed with all the insignia of royalty, his eyes 
became red with anger and he overwhelmed me with reproaches 
and bound my ministers in chains. 
" Having slain his adversary, my brother returned to the city, 
and I, paying obeisance to that great warrior, offered him the 
traditional homage, but he did not respond to my cordial 
congratulations. I touched his feet with my forehead, O Lord, 
but Bah in his anger relused to pardon me." 
CHAPTER 10 
The Origin of Bali's Hatred of Sugriva 
" In my desire to make peace, I tried to placate my brother, 
who, returning, was incensed against me. 
" I said : * By the grace of the Gods, thou art victorious 
and thine enemy has fallen under thy blows ; without thee, 
I should be bereft of support, thou art my only defender, O My 
Protector, My Delight! Now accept this royal canopy of 
many supports, resembling the full moon about to rise. Take 
also these chanwaras from my hands ! 
" ' O King ! For a whole year I waited sadly beside the 
cave and, seeing blood flowing to the entrance and stopping 
187 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
there, my heart was filled with anguish and my mind deeply 
troubled. I then closed the opening of the cavern with a 
great rock and left that place to return to Kishkindha in deep 
distress. Seeing me, the people of that city and the ministers 
also placed me on the throne, without my desiring it. There fore pardon me, thou who art our Sovereign. I was invested 
with royal dignity in thine absence and thus preserved the city, 
its ministers and inhabitants, from anarchy. This kingdom 
has been as a trust to me; I now render it back to thee, O 
Friend. Do not be wrath against me, O Destroyer of thy 
Foes ! Placing my head at thy feet, O King, with joined palms, 
I appeal to thee. It was on the insistence of the ministers 
and the united populace, that I was placed on the throne, 
they reflecting that the country would be seized by an enemy 
in the absence of a monarch.' 
" To this humble speech, Bali answered with invectives, 
saying : — ' Cursed be thou ! ' and repeated the imprecation. 
Then, gathering his subjects and ministers together, he in veighed against me, in the midst of my friends, reproaching 
me with bitter words, saying : — 
" ' Know well, that in anger the great Titan, Mayavi, 
one night challenged me to a long-desired combat. Hearing 
his voice, I left my royal dwelling and was followed immedi ately by my unscrupulous brother, who is present here. In 
the night, seeing me followed by another, that great titan fled 
terrified and both of us pursued him closely. In his haste to 
escape, he entered a great cave, and, seeing that vast and 
fearful cavern, I said to my false-hearted brother : * I cannot 
return to the city till I have slain my rival ; do thou wait 
at the mouth of the pit till. I have struck him down/ In the 
belief that he would remain there, I penetrated into that 
inaccessible cave. 
" ' While I was pursuing mine enemy, whose audacity 
rendered him truly formidable, a whole year elapsed, but at 
last I discovered him and slew him with his entire family. 
That titan, while being slain, roared aloud, and a stream of 
blood that spread all round, filled the cave, making it difficult 
to pass. Having happily slain my cruel adversary, I could 
not find the opening of the cave, the entrance having been 
1 88 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
closed. I called Sugriva again and again but there was no 
response and my situation was serious. By dint of kicking, 
I was able to roll back the rock and emerged, after which I 
returned to the city. That is why I am incensed against the 
wicked Sugriva, whose desire for the throne overcame his 
brotherly affection.* 
*' With these words, the monkey Bali, bereft of all sense of 
shame, chased me from the kingdom with but a single garment, 
having ill-treated me and carried off my consort, O Rama. 
Wretched and deprived of my companions, I took refuge on 
this lofty mountain, Rishyamuka, to which, for a particular 
reason, Bali has no access. This is the whole story of the origin 
of our intense hostility ; I have not merited the great humilia tion that has visited me, as thou now seest, O Raghava. O 
Thou who art the dispeller of fear, do thou take this dread of 
my brother from me and punish him in my name." 
The virtuous prince, having heard the faithful Sugriva's 
narrative, smiling, answered him saying : — 
" These arrows of mine, bright as the sun, never fail to 
reach their target and with their sharp points will strike down 
that evil Bali with force. As long as I do not behold this 
ravisher of thy consort, this wretch of perverse practices will 
live, but not an instant longer. 
" I see thee to be plunged in an ocean of grief, as am I, 
and I shall aid thee to traverse it ; thou shalt certainly regain 
thine erstwhile prosperity." 
Hearing these words, that increased his joy and courage, 
Sugriva, in extreme delight, uttered the following memorable 
words. 
CHAPTER I I 
Sugriva tells Rama of Bali's Exploits 
Having listened to Rama's words, which inspired him with 
joy and courage, Sugriva paid obeisance to him, manifesting 
his gratitude, and said : — " In thy wrath, undoubtedly, thou art 
189 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
able to burn up the worlds with thy sharp arrows, like the fire 
at the end of the great cycle ; yet reflect on the courage of 
Bali and, having heard me with attention, consider what should 
be done. 
" 'Ere the sun rises, the indefatigable Bali strides from 
the western to the eastern ocean and from the northern to 
the southern sea. He is so powerful that he is able to break 
off the lofty mountain peaks, throwing them into the air and 
catching them again. In order to demonstrate his strength, 
he will snap in two innumerable trees of every kind in the forest. 
" Once, there existed a giant, named Dundubhi, in the form 
of a buffalo, who resembled the peak of Mt. Kailasha and who 
was as strong as a thousand elephants. The thought of his 
own might intoxicated him and he was puffed up with pride 
on account of the boons he had received. 
" That giant came to the sea, the Lord of Rivers, and 
approached that ocean of tumultuous waves, rich in pearls, 
saying ; — ( Let us enter into combat one with the other ! * 
But that righteous Lord of the Waters, rising up in all his 
majesty, answered that titan who was driven on by destiny, 
saving : — ' O Skilful Warrior, I am not able to take up thy 
challenge, but hear and I will tell thee of one who can match 
thee in fight. 
" ' On a vast plain, the retreat of the ascetics, there lives a 
monarch of the mountains, named Himavat, the far-famed 
father-in-law of Shiva. He possesses great rivers, many 
ravines and waterfalls and is well able to satisfy thine over whelming lust for combat.' Reflecting : * The ocean holds 
me in dread', that foremost of titans sped to the forest of 
Himavat, as swift as an arrow loosed from a bow. 
" Breaking off the great white cliffs, Dundubhi let them roll 
down, shouting with exultation. Then, like a mass of white 
cloud, Himavat of gentle and benign aspect, standing on the 
summit of the mountain, addressed that titan thus : — ' Do not 
torment me, O Dundubhi, O Thou who delightest in justice ! 
I am not concerned with the exploits of warriors but am a 
refuge of the ascetics.* 
" Hearing these words of that righteous monarch of the 
mountains, Dundubhi, his eyes red with anger, answered : — 
190 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
" ■ If thou hast not the strength to fight and art paralysed 
with fear, then tell me who is able to match his prowess with 
mine, for I wish to enter into combat with him.' 
" Hearing this, the wise Himavat, skilful in discourse, 
answered that powerful titan to whom he had spoken previously, 
saying : — 
" ' The name of that hero of great intelligence, who dwells 
in Kishkindha, is Bah, the illustrious son of Shakra. That 
great sage is a skilful warrior and of thy stature, he is as well 
able to enter into combat with thee as Vasava with Namuchi. 
Go with all speed and seek him out, since thou art thirsting 
to fight; he has little patience and is ever full of martial 
ardour.' 
" Having listened to the words of Himavat, Dundubhi in 
fury went to Kishkindha, Bali's city, and assuming the form 
of a terrible buffalo with pointed horns, resembling a thunder cloud charged with rain in the sky, that powerful titan came 
to the gates of the capital. Causing the earth to tremble with 
his cries, he uprooted the trees near the entrance of the city, 
snapping them in two. Then, like an elephant, he burst open 
the gates. 
" My brother, who was in the inner apartments, hearing 
the tumult, came out, full of impatience, surrounded by his 
wives, like the moon encircled with stars, and that leader of the 
monkeys, Bali, said to Dundubhi in clear and measured 
accents : — 
" ' O Dundubhi, why dost thou obstruct the gateway of the 
city and bellow thus ? I know who thou art. Have a care 
for thy life, O Warrior ! * 
" At these words of the sagacious King of the Monkeys, 
Dundubhi, his eyes red with anger, answered : — 
" * Do not address me thus in the presence of women, O 
Warrior ! Accept my challenge and meet me in combat to-day, 
so that I can measure thy strength, though, O Monkey, I am 
willing to restrain my wrath for one night, to allow thee to 
indulge in the pleasures of love, according to thy whim, till 
the rising of the sun. Distribute alms, therefore, to thy 
monkeys and embrace them for the last time. Thou an the 
King of the Deer of the Trees, do thou load thy friends and 
191 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
people with favours. Look long on Kishkindha ; enjoy the 
company of thy wives, for I am about to chastise thee for 
thine insolence. To slay a drunken man or one who is 
demented or whose strength has ebbed away or who is without 
weapons or defence, or one, like thee, given over to lust, is 
considered equal to infanticide in the world.' 
" Dismissing all his wives, including Tara and others, my 
brother, restraining his wrath, smiling, answered that chief 
of the titans, saying : — 
" ' Do not make a pretext of my being inebriated if thou art 
not afraid to enter into combat with me ! Know that in the 
present issue this intoxication is the wine of warriors ! * 
" With these words he threw off the golden chain that his 
sire, Mahendra, had given him and began to fight. Seizing 
Dundubhi by the horns, who resembled a mountain, that 
elephant among monkeys roared aloud and began to assail 
him with blows. Thereafter Bali with a tremendous shout 
threw him on the ground and blood began to flow from the 
stricken buffalo. 
" Then betwixt the two combatants, Bah and Dundubhi, 
mad with anger, each desirous of overcoming the other, a 
terrible struggle ensued. My brother fought with matchless 
courage, equal to Indra's, dealing blows with his fists, knees, 
feet and also with rocks and trees. The duel between the 
monkey and the titan caused the latter to weaken, whilst the 
strength of the former grew. In the end, Bah, lifting Dundubhi 
up, let him fall on the earth and in this death struggle the 
giant perished. 
" As he fell blood flowed in rivers from the veins of his 
body and that titan of vast limbs lay stretched on the ground, 
having rejoined the elements. 
" Lifting up the inanimate corpse in his two arms, Bali 
with one throw sent it flying to a distance of four miles. From 
the titan's jaws, shattered by the violence of the fall, blood 
spouted forth and the drops were carried by the wind to 
Matanga's hermitage. Seeing that rain of blood, the Sage, 
displeased, reflected : ' What perverse wretch has dared to 
spatter me with blood ? Who is this evil, perfidious and vile 
creature, this madman ? ' 
192 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
" Thinking thus, that excellent Muni went out of the her mitage and beheld the buffalo, as large as a mountain, lying 
dead on the ground. By virtue of his austerities, he knew that 
a monkey was responsible for this deed and he pronounced a 
terrible curse on that ape who had thrown the corpse there saying: — 
" ' May he never come here ! If that monkey who, with a 
stream of blood, has desecrated this wood where I have built 
my retreat, ever sets foot in this place, he will die ! Should 
that wicked wretch who has thrown the corpse of this titan 
here, breaking my trees, come within four miles of my hermitage, 
he shall assuredly not survive and his confederates, whosoever 
they may be, who have sought refuge in my forest, will not be 
permitted to remain here following this malediction. Let 
them go where they will, for I shall assuredly curse any who 
stay in these woods, that I have protected like mine own off spring, and destroy the foliage and young shoots, plucking the 
fruit and scratching up the roots. From to-day, every 
monkey that I see here will be changed into stone for the 
period of a thousand years ! * 
" On hearing the words of the ascetic, all the monkeys that 
frequented those woods went away, and, beholding diem 
issuing from the forest, Bah enquired of them, saying : — 
" ' Why have ye all come here, ye dwellers in the Matanga 
Forest ? Happy are they who dwell in the woods ! ' 
" Then those monkeys told Bali, who wore a chain of gold, 
the cause of their departure and also of the curse that had been 
laid on them. 
" My brother, hearing the monkeys* words, sought out that 
great Rishi and with joined palms attempted to appease him, 
but Matanga refused to listen to him and re-entered his 
hermitage. 
" Trembling under the shadow of that curse, Bali began to 
roam about aimlessly, but, terrified of the malediction, that 
monkey did not dare approach the great mountain Rishyamuka 
or even glance in that direction, O Prince. 
" Knowing he will never venture here, O Rama, I wander 
about these woods with my companions, free of all anxiety 
The heaped bones of Dundubhi, the victim of the arrogance, 
his strength inspired in him, are here and resemble the peak 
193 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
of a vast mountain. Bali in his might, stripped all the leaves 
from these seven giant Sala trees with their mighty boughs, 
one after the other. His strength is immeasurable, O Rama ; 
I have now proved it to thee. In consequence, I do not see 
how thou canst overcome him in battle, O King." 
Thus spoke Sugriva and Lakshmana, smiling, then enquired 
of him : — 
" What can Rama do to convince thee that he is able to 
overcome him ? " Sugriva then made answer : — 
" If Rama is able to penetrate these seven Sala trees, that 
Bali pierced again and again, with a single arrow, then, by that 
sign, I shall know he can overcome him. At the same time, 
let him with a single kick send the carcase of the buffalo flying 
to a distance of a hundred bows' length." 
Having spoken, Sugriva, the corners of whose eyes were 
slightly red, reflected awhile and then once more addressed 
Rama, the descendant of Kakutstha, saying : — 
" Full of courage and audacity, renowned for his strength 
and energy, that powerful monkey has never been defeated 
in combat. His exploits are famous ; the Gods themselves 
are not able to accomplish them. It was on remembering 
them, filled with terror, that I resolved to take refuge on the 
Rishyamuka Mountain. Thinking of that Indra among 
Monkeys and how invincible, irresistible and ruthless he is, 
I came here. Filled with distress and anguish, I wander about 
in these woods with my devoted and excellent companions, 
Hanuman and others. Thou art for me a glorious and illus trious friend, O Thou who art dear to thy friends, O Lion 
among Men ! I take refuge with thee as in another Himavat ; 
yet I am conversant with the strength of my wicked brother and 
his overbearing nature and I am not acquainted with thy skill 
as a warrior, O Raghava. Assuredly, it is not that I wish to 
test thee or humiliate thee nor inspire thee with fear by re counting his great exploits. Mine own cowardice is well 
known ! O Rama, thine accents, thine assurance, thy temerity 
and thy stature truly manifest thy great power, which is like 
a fire concealed beneath the ashes." 
Hearing the words of the magnanimous Sugriva, Rama 
began to smile and answered him, saying : — 
194 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
" If thou dost not trust in our courage, O Monkey, I will 
instil thee with that confidence so essential in war." 
Then with his foot, that mighty hero sent the dried up 
carcase of that titan flying. Seeing the carcase hurtling through 
the air, Sugriva once more addressed Rama, who was as 
radiant as the sun, in the presence of Lakshmana and the 
monkeys and in candid accents said : — 
" O my Friend, when that corpse was fresh and its flesh 
intact, it was sent flying through the air by my brother, though 
he was weakened by inebriation and fatigue. Now stripped 
of flesh, as light as a straw, thou hast kicked it in play; it is 
therefore impossible for me to judge who is the more powerful, 
thou or Bali. Between a fresh corpse and dry bones, there is 
a great difference, O Raghava. 
"I am therefore still uncertain, My Dear Friend, as to who 
is the stronger, thou or Bali, but if thou art able to pierce even 
a single Sala tree, then I should be able to judge who is superior 
and who inferior. Therefore stretch that bow, which re sembles the trunk of an elephant and drawing the cord up to 
thine ear, discharge that great arrow, which I am sure will 
penetrate the Sala tree and by that sign I shall be satisfied. 
I implore thee, O Prince, to do me this great favour. As 
amongst the planets the sun is greatest and among mountains 
the Himalayas, just as among quadrupeds the lion is king, 
so among men thou art supreme in valour." 
CHAPTER 12 
The Fight between Sugriva and Bali 
Hearing Sugriva's gracious speech, Rama, in order to inspire 
him with confidence, took up his bow and a formidable arrow, 
and taking aim, pierced the Sala trees, filling the firmament 
with the sound. 
Loosed by that mighty warrior, the arrow, decorated with 
gold, passed through the seven Sala trees and entering the 
mountain, buried itself in the earth. In the twinkling of an 
195 o 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
eye that shaft with the speed of lightning, having pierced the 
seven trees with extreme velocity, returned to Rama's quiver. 
Seeing those seven trees pierced by Rama's impetuous arrow, 
that Bull among Monkeys was extremely astonished and, 
overcome with joy adorned with all his ornaments, prostrated 
himself before Raghava with joined palms, his forehead 
touching the earth, 
Amazed at Rama's prowess, he addressed that great warrior, 
skilled in the scriptural traditions, as also in the use of every 
weapon, who stood before him and said : — 
" O Lion among Men, with thine arrows, thou art able to 
destroy all the Gods with their King in combat, why not 
Bali also? O Kakutstha, who can resist thee on the field of 
battle, thou, who hast pierced seven Sala trees, the mountain 
and the earth with a single arrow ! Now my anxieties are 
dispelled and my satisfaction complete. Where could I find 
a friend such as thou, who art equal to Mahendra and 
Varuna ? For my sake do thou subdue mine adversary in the 
form of a brother, I implore thee ! " 
Rama, embracing the handsome Sugriva, like unto Laksh mana, in his great wisdom answered him, saying : — 
" Let us leave here without delay for Kishkindha. Do thou 
precede us. When we come to that city, O Sugriva, it is for 
thee to challenge Bali, who is a brother in name only." 
Thereafter they started out in all haste for Kishkindha, Bali's 
capital. Concealing themselves behind some trees, they 
halted in a dense wood where Sugriva hurled defiance at Bah' 
with a deep and challenging roar. His clothes tightly wrapped 
round him, he shouted with all bis strength, shattering 
the silence of the firmament. 
When the powerful Bah heard his brother emitting this 
tremendous clamour, he was livid with anger and rushed out 
like the sun rising over the mountain top. Then a terrible struggle 
ensued between Bah and Sugriva, resembling the clash of 
Mars and Jupiter, in the heavens. 
With the striking of their palms like the clap of thunder and 
their fists that were as hard as diamonds, the two brothers, 
filled with fury, assaulted each other, whilst Rama, bow in hand, 
watched those two combatants, who resembled the Ashwins. 
r 96 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
Not being able to distinguish between Bali and Sugriva, 
Rama was loath to loose his death-dealing shaft. Then 
Sugriva, overcome by Bali, seeing that Rama refrained from 
coming to his aid, ran towards the Rishyamuka Mountain. 
Exhausted, his limbs covered with blood, crushed by his 
brother's blows, who pressed him furiously, he took refuge in 
the vast forest. The mighty Bali, seeing him penetrating 
deep into the woods, said : — 
" Go ! I spare thee ! " he himself not venturing to enter 
there, through fear of the curse. 
Then Rama, accompanied by his brother and Hanuman, re entering the wood, found the monkey Sugriva. When the 
latter perceived Rama returning with Lakshmana, he hung his 
head in shame and in a tearful voice, his eyes fixed on the 
ground, said : — 
"After demonstrating thy strength, thou didst issue the 
command : ' Challenge thine adversary ! * Thereafter thou 
didst allow him to defeat me. Why hast thou done this ? 
O Raghava, thou shouldst have told me frankly : * I do not 
wish to slay Bali,' then 1 would not have left this place." Thus 
in sad and reproachful tones did the great-souled Sugriva 
speak, and Rama answered him, saying : — 
" O Sugriva, My Dear Friend, do not vex thyself but hear 
the reason why I did not discharge mine arrow. Thine 
ornaments, clothes, shape and gestures and those of Bali so 
resembled each other that there was no difference between 
you ! The voice, colour, look, prowess and speech were wholly 
similar, O Monkey! Disconcerted by thine exact resemblance, 
O Best of Monkeys, I did not let fly my swift and dreadful 
death-dealing arrow, the slayer of the foe, for this reason. 
' One must have a care not to destroy them both,' I reflected. 
In truth, had I made an end of thine existence, O Chief of the 
Monkeys, through ignorance or carelessness, then my stupidity 
and heedlessness would have been apparent. To kill one's 
ally is assuredly a great and heinous sin. Further, I, Laksh mana and the fair-complexioned Sita are all wholly dependent 
on thee ; in the forest, thou art our refuge. Enter once more 
into combat, therefore, and fear nothing, O Monkey. In the 
twinkling of an eye, thou shalt see me piercing Bali with my 
197 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
shaft and striking him down; thou shalt see him writhing 
on the field of battle. Do thou, however, wear a distinguishing 
sign, O Chief of the Monkeys, by the help of which I may 
recognize thee in the thick of the struggle. O Lakshmana, 
these blossoming and beautiful Gajapushpi flowers, do thou 
place round the neck of the magnanimous Sugriva." 
Plucking the blossoming Gajapushpi from where it grew, 
Lakshmana placed it round the neck of Sugriva. The creeper 
that the fortunate Sugriva wore round his neck was as bright 
as the sun and resembled a circle of cranes illumining a cloud 
over which they are planing. Sparkling with beauty and 
encouraged by Rama's words, Sugriva started on the road to 
Kishkindha with him. 
CHAPTER I 3 
The Hermitage of Saptajanas 
The virtuous elder brother of Lakshmana, together with 
Sugriva, left the Rishyamuka Mountain and proceeded towards 
Kishkindha, which was maintained by Bali's valour, Rama 
bearing his golden bow and carrying his arrows that shone 
like the sun in his hand. 
Sugriva, his neck adorned with a wreath of flowers, full of 
courage, strode before the magnanimous Raghava and Laksh mana, behind whom came the hero Hanuman with Nala, the 
valiant Nila and the illustrious general Tara, renowned among 
the monkeys. 
They observed the trees bowed with the weight of their 
flowers and the rivers bearing their peaceful waters to the sea. 
The ravines and cliffs with their chasms, caves, peaks and 
charming dales, the lakes with their limpid waters of emerald 
hue, adorned with opening lotus buds, drew their gaze as they 
passed. Ducks, cranes, swans, woodcock and other waterfowl 
were heard calling, whilst in the clearings of the woods deer 
could be seen grazing on the tender grass and young shoots, 
without fear of the wild beasts that roamed everywhere. 
Wild and ferocious elephants adorned with ivory tusks, 
who proved a menace to the lakes by causing the banks to 
198 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
crumble, wandered about here and there and intoxicated with 
Mada juice, striking their foreheads against the rocks, resembled 
moving mountains. Monkeys as large as elephants, covered 
with dust and every species of wild beast and bird were 
seen by the followers of Sugriva as they passed on their 
way. 
Advancing thus in all haste, the Joy of the House of Raghu, 
Rama, seeing a grove of trees, enquired of Sugriva : — " What 
is this clump of trees like a cloud in the sky ? Indeed they 
seem like a mass of clouds ringed round by plantain groves ! 
Great is my curiosity concerning them, O My Friend. I 
wish to learn of thee what these are." 
On this enquiry from Rama, Sugriva, still walking on, told 
him the history of that great wood. " O Rama ! It is a vast 
hermitage that removes all weariness and encloses many 
pleasant gardens and groves ; the roots, fruit and water are 
delicious. Under the name of Saptajanas, seven Munis of 
rigid vows lived there, lying in the water, their heads alone 
emerging from it. Every seven days they partook of food, 
which was the wind from the mountain on which they dwelt. 
After seven hundred years they ascended to heaven in their 
bodies. Through the power of their asceticism, this hermitage, 
encircled by a hedge of trees, is inaccessible even to the Gods 
and Asuras, as well as their leaders. The birds eschew it, as 
also the other beasts of the forest ; those who enter it un wittingly never return. Lovely melodies are heard issuing 
therefrom with the music of instruments and singing. Some times a divine fragrance is spread abroad from there, O 
Raghava, and three fires are lit ; it is their smoke that one can 
see from here ; the tops of the trees are enveloped in it like a 
golden cloud, resembling the plumage of a dove. 
" These trees are magnificent with their tops crowned with 
smoke, like unto mountains of emerald crowned with rain 
clouds. Pay obeisance with reverence to them with joined 
palms, O Valiant Raghava, as also thy brother, Lakshmana. 
Those who offer salutations to those Rishis of pure soul experi ence naught that is grievous." 
Then Raghava with his brother Lakshmana, with joined 
palms, offered salutations to those illustrious ascetics. Having 
199 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
paid reverence to them, the virtuous Rama, his brother Laksh mana and Sugriva with his monkeys went on happily. 
Having left the hermitage of Saptajanas far behind, they 
beheld the inaccessible Kishkindha protected by Bali. Rama, 
his younger brother Lakshmana and the monkeys, famed for 
their valour, seizing their weapons, once more prepared to slay 
their enemy in that city which the son of the Chief of the 
Gods protected by his prowess. 
chapter i 4 
Sugriva again challenges his brother to fight 
Returning to Kishkindha, Bali's city, they all concealed 
themselves behind the trees in the dense forest. Glancing 
round on every side, the Friend of the Woods, the thick necked Sugriva began to exhibit signs of extreme anger and, 
surrounded by bis kinsmen, let out a loud roar, challenging 
his brother to fight. Shattering the firmament with his war cry which resembled a great thundercloud propelled by a 
high wind, that monkey, who was endowed with a leonine 
gait and resembled the rising sun, stepped forth. 
Looking at Rama who was skilled in combat, Sugriva said 
to him : — " Behold Kishkindha, surrounded by its walls made 
of gold and a rampart of monkeys, that is bristling with instru ments of war and from which innumerable banners stream. 
This is Bali's citadel. Now fulfil the promise formerly made 
to me of slaying him, O Hero, as the blessing of Spring visits 
the creepers." 
At Sugriva's words, the virtuous Rama, the destroyer of 
his foes, answered : — " Thou art wearing that which will 
enable me to distinguish thee, this garland of Gaja flowers, 
placed by Lakshmana round thy neck ! This creeper worn 
by thee lends thee the brilliance of the sky in which the sun 
is surrounded by stars, O Warrior. To-day, O Monkey, I 
will deliver thee from the fear and hostility that Bali inspires 
in thee. Point out thine adversary in the guise of a brother, 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
O Sugriva 1 Till Bali is struck down in the forest, let him 
make merry, for when he crosses my path, he will not return 
alive. If he should do so, thou wilt be justified in reproaching 
me for not honouring my word. 
" In thy presence, seven Sala trees were transfixed by me 
with a single arrow; rest assured that Bali will fall to-day 
on the field of battle under my shafts. 
" No light word has ever passed my lips, even in adversity, 
nor ever shall, even were it to attain my purpose ; therefore 
banish all anxiety. 
" Like a field rendered fertile by the rains of Shatakratu, do 
thou challenge Bali of the golden diadem. O Sugriva, raise 
a shout that will cause that monkey, proud of his victory, 
whom thou wert unable to subdue before, and who is bellicose 
by nature, to come forth. Those who deem themselves brave 
are not able to endure the war-cry of their foes, above all in 
the presence of women." 
Hearing Rama's words, the golden-hued Sugriva let out a 
deafening roar, rending the skies. 
Terrified by the clamour, the kine ran hither and thither, 
like noble women exposed to danger of hostile attack through 
the negligence of their loved ones, and the wild deer fled away 
like maddened war horses wounded in battie, whilst the birds 
fell to the ground like planets whose virtue is exhausted. 
Then that son of Surya emitted a roar resembling thunder, 
confident of his strength and radiant with courage, like the 
ocean whose waves are lashed by a tempest. 
CHAPTER i 5 
Tara's Advice to Bali 
His brother Bali, who was seated amidst his wives in the inner 
apartments, heard the cry of the great-hearted Sugriva and 
was filled with wrath. When he caught the sound of that 
uproar, causing terror to all beings, his feelings of lust changed 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALM1KI 
to those of violent anger and, his limbs trembling with fury, 
he who formerly shone like gold suddenly lost his brilliance, 
like the sun under eclipse. Grinding his teeth, his eyes flash ing with fire, he resembled a lake from which the lotuses have 
been uprooted. Hearing that unendurable cry, that monkey 
strode forth in great haste, stamping on the earth as if he 
wished to shatter it. 
Then Tara, embracing him tenderly, once more avowed her 
devotion to him and, timid and troubled, addressed him in 
these words, the wisdom of which the future was to prove : — 
" O Brave Warrior, this anger that has taken hold of thee 
is like a raging torrent ; do thou abandon it, as on rising in 
the morning thou dost throw aside a faded garland. To morrow at dawn, enter into combat with Sugriva, O Valiant 
Forest Dweller, for thou dost not yet know the strength or 
weakness of thine enemy. That thou shouldst set out immedi ately does not meet with my approval. Hear while I tell 
thee the reason why I seek to delay thee ! 
" Formerly Sugriva, in great anger, came hither and challenged 
thee to fight, but defeated and overwhelmed by thy blows, 
he fled. Having been assaulted and crushed in this wise, 
he now returns to challenge thee again, which rouses my 
suspicion. To roar thus in so insolent and arrogant a manner, 
so filled with wrath, is not done without a particular motive. 
To my mind, Sugriva has not returned alone but has an escort 
who is ready to rush to his defence ; hence this cry of defiance. 
Sugriva is a naturally clever and sagacious monkey and will 
never ally himself to one whose valour has not been tried. 
This, O Warrior, is what I have heard from the youthful 
Prince Angada; take heed therefore and have a care; it is 
to thine advantage ! He hath told me all that he has heard 
from his emissaries concerning Sugriva while journeying in the 
forest. Two sons were bora to the King of Ayodhya, full of 
courage, invincible in combat ; they are of the House of 
Ikshwaku and are renowned ; their names are Rama and 
Lakshmana. 
" These two indomitable heroes have sealed a pact of friend ship with Sugriva, and this ally of thy brother is Rama, famed 
for his military exploits, the Destroyer of Enemy Hosts, who 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
resembles the fire at the end of the world cycle. He dwells 
in the forest and is the supreme refuge of all the virtuous 
who seek his protection. He is the support of the oppressed, 
the unique repository of all glory and is conversant with both 
secular and spiritual learning ; his pleasure consists in carrying 
out the behests of bis Sire. 
" As the King of the Mountains is a treasury of precious 
metals, so is he a mine of every good quality. It is peace 
and not war that thou shouldst seek with that magnanimous 
One, the invincible Rama, whose prowess on the battlefield 
is without limit. O Hero, I have no desire to oppose thee, 
but tell thee this for thy good. Therefore, heed my counsel ! 
Do not seek a quarrel with thy younger brother, O Valiant 
Monarch. I am certain it is to thine advantage to contract 
a friendship with Rama. Reconcile thyself with Sugriva and 
put all thoughts of hatred far from thee. Thy younger brother 
is an inhabitant of the forest of amiable qualities. Whether he 
dwell here or there, he is bound to thee from every point of 
view, and I do not see any like him in the world. With gifts, 
honours and in other ways, bind him to thyself through kind ness. Abandon thine ill-will and let him in future dwell near 
thee. The thick-necked Sugriva is a powerful, valuable and 
natural ally. Win back thy brother's affection ; there is no 
other way to happiness for thee here. If thou dost desire to 
please me and recognizest my devotion to thee, then in the 
name of affection, O My Friend, I implore thee to act as I 
have counselled. Follow my advice which is salutary; trust 
me and do not give way to anger ; live in peace with the son 
of the King of Koshala ; do not quarrel with him, his valour 
is equal to Indra's." 
In these words, which were full of wisdom and would have 
enabled him to save himself, Tara addressed Bali, but he 
refused to listen and, driven by the force of destiny, advanced 
to meet his death. 
203 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 16 
Rama inflicts a mortal Wound on Bali 
Thus spoke Tara, whose face was as radiant as the moon, 
and Bali answered her in tones of reproach, saying: — 
" When my brother, who is above all mine adversary, 
challenges me in anger, how shall I endure it, O Lady of 
Lovely Countenance ? The brave who are not accustomed to 
bearing insults and who never turn back in battle, O Timid 
One, would rather suffer death than such ignominy. I may 
not disregard the weak-necked Sugriva who, in his determination 
to enter into combat, has offered me so insolent a challenge. 
" Have no anxiety on my behalf regarding Raghava, for he is 
conversant with dharma and pious by nature. How could he 
do wrong ? Return home with thy companions ! Why follow 
me further ? Thou hast demonstrated thy tender devotion 
sufficiently ! I am about to set out to fight Sugriva ; control 
thine emotions. I shall punish his insolence, but I shall not 
take his life. I shall enter into combat with him, since he 
desires it, and, assailed by the blows dealt with my fists and 
the trunks of trees, he will flee. That coward will not be 
able to withstand my strength and prowess. O Tara, thou 
hast accompanied me far enough and shown thine affection 
for me sufficiently, now return, and I, having obtained satis faction from my brother on the battlefield, will follow thee; 
I swear it by my life and race." 
Then the virtuous Tara, embracing Bali and speaking 
tenderly to him, weeping, circumambulated him, keeping him 
on her right hand, and bidding him farewell according to the 
tradition and reciting the sacred texts so that he might return 
victorious, she re-entered the inner apartments, distracted with 
grief. 
When Tara reached the inner sanctuary with the other 
women, Bali, distraught with anger, went out of the city, 
304 
KISHKINDHA KAKDA 
hissing like a great serpent. Full of ire, breathing heavily, 
he ran with all his strength, looking round on every side, 
eager to find his adversary. 
At last he beheld that powerful monkey, the golden-hued 
Sugriva, clothed in excellent armour, full of confidence, resem bling a brazier, and, seeing him inflated with pride, Bali wrapped 
his garments more tightly about him, a prey to extreme anger. 
Having thus girded up his apparel, his fists clenched, full of 
vigour, he advanced to meet Sugriva and engage him in combat. 
From his side, Sugriva, also doubling his fists in rage, went 
out to meet his brother who was wearing a crown of gold. 
Then Bali, addressing Sugriva, whose eyes were red with 
anger, who was skilled in the art of fighting and was rushing 
towards him in fury, said : — 
" With this clenched fist, its fingers tightly closed, I shall 
deal thee a blow that will cause thee to yield up thy life." 
At these words, Sugriva, livid with anger, answered : — " It 
is mine that will drive the life's breath out of thee by caving 
in thy skull." Thereafter, violently assaulted by Bali, he 
hurled himself on him in fury, rivers of blood streaming from 
him, like a mountain from which torrents fall. Unperturbed, 
Sugriva, tearing up a Sala tree, struck his rival's body as 
lightning fells a mountain peak. Struck by the Sala tree 
which unnerved him, Bali resembled a heavily-laden ship, 
sinking with all its cargo in the waves. Endowed with terrific 
strength and as agile as Suparna, both fought like two 
formidable giants resembling the sun and moon in the sky. 
Each of these two destroyers of their foes sought to find the 
weak point of his enemy. 
Bali excelled in strength and valour while the son of Surya, 
Sugriva, despite his great energy, was the weaker, and his 
courage beginning to dwindle, he ceased to boast and, enraged 
with his brother, made a sign to Rama. 
The uprooted trees with their branches and crests, the 
blows from fists, knees and feet, fell thick and fast in the 
formidable struggle that resembled the duel between Vritra 
and Vasava. Covered with blood, the two monkeys, dwellers 
in the forest, whilst fighting resembled two thunderclouds 
clashing together with a great uproar. 
205 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Rama, observing Sugriva, the Prince of Monkeys, exhausted 
scanning the horizon without ceasing to struggle, and, seeing 
that he was almost overcome, selected an arrow for the purpose 
of slaying Bali, and that great hero stretched his bow and with 
that shaft, resembling a venomous serpent, held it ready, 
like Antaka, bearing the Wheel of Time. The twanging of 
the bowstring caused alarm among the birds, who flew away, 
as also the wild beasts who fled in terror as at the end of the 
world period. 
Discharged by Rama with a sound like the crash of thunder, 
that formidable arrow of dazzling aspect pierced Bali's breast, 
and under its fatal impact the powerful and valiant King of 
the Monkeys fell to the earth, resembling Indra's banner 
ruthlessly thrown to the ground on the day of the full moon 
in the month of the constellation of Aries. 
Stricken and senseless, Bah fell, his voice strangled with sobs 
which gradually died away. Rama, the strongest of men, 
discharged that formidable, fiery and death-dealing arrow, 
shining like gold, resembling Time itself at the end of the 
world, which shot forth like smoke issuing from the flaming 
mouth of Hara, and, streaming with blood looked like unto 
a blossoming Ashoka tree on the mountain-side, whereupon 
the Son of Vasava, like the banner of Indra that has been 
overthrown, fell senseless on the field of battle. 
chapter i 7 
Bali reproaches Rama 
Struck by Rama's arrow, that doughty warrior fell to the 
earth, like a tree severed by an axe. With his ornaments of 
fine gold, his limbs paralysed, he sank to the ground, like the 
banner of the Chief of the Gods, its cord severed. 
At the tall of the King of the Monkeys, the earth grew dark, 
resembling the firmament bereft of the moon. Though lying 
on the earth, the body of that high-souled Bah was neither 
robbed of its beauty nor of its life's breath, nor did his courage 
206 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
fail him, for that excellent golden necklace that Indra had 
bestowed on him preserved the life, strength and beauty of 
that Lord of Monkeys. Adorned with that golden chain, 
the heroic Monkey Chief appeared like an evening cloud 
tinged with the roseate hues of dusk ! His chain, his body 
and the arrow piercing bis heart blazed in triple glory, even 
after he had fallen. That arrow loosed by the valiant Rama 
from his bow, by its virtue opening the way to heaven, brought 
Bali supreme deliverance. 
Lying on the field of battle, like a fire without flame, he 
resembled Yayati cast forth from the divine realms, fallen on 
the earth, his merits exhausted. Like the sun that Time, at 
the end of the world, throws down on the earth ; unapproach able like Mahendra, inaccessible as Upendra, with his golden 
necklace, his broad chest, his vast arms, his mouth inflamed, 
his glances wild, that son of a mighty king lay. And Rama 
followed by Lakshmana, their eyes fixed upon him, approached 
that warrior lying there like a naked flame about to be quenched. 
Full of respect for that hero, who was gazing at them, the two 
valiant brothers, Rama and Lakshmana, approached with 
slow steps. 
On perceiving them, the supremely courageous Bali uttered 
these harsh words, that seemed both restrained and just. 
Stretched on the earth, almost without lustre, mortally wounded, 
motionless, in words pregnant with meaning he addressed 
that warrior proudly, saying : — 
" Striking me from behind, what merit dost thou hope to 
earn by this, O Thou who hast inflicted a mortal wound on 
me, while I was engaged in combat with another ? * The virtu- 
ous Rama is full of nobility, generosity and valour ; he is 
compassionate, devoted to the welfare of all beings, fixed in 
his duty ; gracious, omnipotent and conversant with the rules 
of conduct and austerity ; these are the praises sung of thee, 
these are the merits attributed to thee by the whole world! 
** Self-mastery, forbearance, loyalty, fixity of purpose, good will and heroism are the virtues of kings, O Prince, as also 
the repression of evil deeds. It was reflecting on these virtues, 
believing them to be thine, that I came to fight Sugriva. 
'Whilst I am filled with rage and engaged in combat with 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
another, he will not attack me' was my conviction, even 
without knowing thee. Now I perceive that thou art a 
perverse creature, feigning piety whilst in truth thou art 
like a well concealed in the grass, without faith and resorting 
to evil deeds. Outwardly virtuous, wearing the cloak of integrity, 
thou art in reality a scoundrel, like a fire bidden by ashes, nor 
do I recognize thee behind the concealing mask of virtue. 
" Since I have neither laid waste thy land, nor thy city 
and have not offered thee insult, why hast thou destroyed me 
— I who am guiltless and who have ever fed on fruit and 
roots, a monkey dwelling in the forest, who never sought to 
enter into combat with thee but who was engaged in fighting 
another ? Thou art the son of a king and inspired confidence 
by thy benign aspect and, what is more, thou wearest the 
livery of sanctity ; who of the warrior caste, conversant with 
what is good and evil, in the garb of a righteous man, would 
commit such a wicked deed ? 
" Thou art born of the House of Raghu and art spoken of 
as virtuous, how canst thou, assuming the guise of an ascetic, 
wander about thus ? Equanimity of soul, liberality, forbear ance, justice, loyalty, constancy and courage are the character istics of a king, O Prince, also the meting out of punishment 
to the guilty. 
" We live in the forest, O Rama, and are but wild beasts 
who feed on roots and fruits, which is natural to us ; but 
thou art a man, O Prince ! Land, gold and beauty are the 
causes of ctiscord, but here in the woods, who will envy us 
fruit and roots ? In temporal and spiritual matters, as well as 
in the dispensing of reward and punishment, a king should 
be wholly given up to the task of government and not dominated 
by any desire for pleasure, but thou art consumed by thy 
desires ; irascible, restless, disregarding the royal code, thy 
bow is thy cherished argument ! Thou dost not pursue the path 
of duty nor does thine understanding concern itself with the 
interests of the people ; a slave to lust, thou dost permit thy 
senses to rule thee, O Chief of Men. In a word, Kakutstha, 
thou hast slain me, who never did thee any harm ! How wilt 
thou answer in the assembly of the virtuous, having committed 
this reprehensible deed ? 
208 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
" The regicide, the brahmanicide, the slayer of the cow, the 
thief and the one who finds pleasure in the destruction of 
other beings, the unbeliever and the one who weds before his 
elder brother, all these enter hell. The informer, the miser, 
the one who slays his friend or denies his Guru's bed, un doubtedly descends to the region of evil-doers ! 
" It is not permitted to the well-born to clothe themselves 
in my skin, nor may those, such as thou, partake of my flesh 
if they follow the tradition. There are five kinds of animals 
possessing five nails on each paw that may be enjoyed by the 
brahmin and the warrior, O Rama. They are the porcupine, 
the hedgehog, the deer, the hare and the tortoise. O Rama, 
men of worth will not touch my skin or bones nor eat my flesh. 
" Alas ! I disregarded Tara, who, sagacious and prudent, 
offered me sound counsel, but in my folly, overpowered by 
fate, I did not heed it. O Kakutstha, like a virtuous woman 
who has married a man devoid of faith, the earth is without a 
protector, since thou art its protector. How canst thou be 
born of the magnanimous Dasaratha, seeing that thou art 
deceitful, mischievous, evil-hearted and treacherous ? Having 
exceeded the bounds of restraint, broken the law of the virtuous 
and disregarded the goad of justice, that elephant, Rama, 
has struck me down. Guilty of such an infamy, condemned 
by the wise, finding thyself in their presence, what wilt thou say? 
" That valour that has been so greatly vaunted to us who 
are neutral, I do not see thee exercising against evil-doers I 
If thou hadst fought me openly, O Prince, thou wouldst now 
find thyself in the presence of death, having been slain by me. 
Thou didst overcome me by taking me unawares, as a serpent 
bites a sleeping man, I who was else invincible. Thou art ruled 
by evil. In order to gratify Sugriva, thou hast struck me down. 
" If thou hadst first confided thy purpose to me, I would 
have brought Sita back to thee in a day. Not only this, but 
I should have placed that wicked ravisher of thy spouse, the 
titan, Ravana, in thy power, a chain round his neck, having 
laid him low in combat. Even if Sita had been cast into the 
bottom of the sea or hell itself, I should have brought her 
back to thee at thy command, as Vishnu recovered the scriptures 
that had been borne away by Hayagriva. 
209 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
" Sugriva would have obtained the throne legitimately on 
my departure to the celestial realm, whereas now he has 
acquired it wrongfully, since thou hast overcome me by craft 
on the field of battle. As death in this world is inevitable, 
I hold it as naught but how wilt thou justify thy conduct 
towards me ? " 
Thus, pierced by an arrow, his features altered, did that 
magnanimous son of the Monarch of Monkeys speak whilst 
looking on Rama, who was as radiant as the sun, after which 
he fell silent. 
CHAPTER I 8 
Rama answers Bali 
Such was the speech, dictated by a sense of duty and his own 
interests, full of censure and harsh in tone, that Bali, who was 
mortally wounded, made to Rama. Resembling the sun 
shorn of its rays or a parched cloud or a fire that has been 
extinguished, that illustrious King of the Monkeys, endowed 
with justice and reason, having upbraided Rama with severity, 
was addressed by him in the following words : — 
" O Bali, why dost thou inveigh against me like a child, 
since thou art wholly ignorant of the traditions of duty, profit 
and social convention?1 Without consulting thine elders, 
who are held in respect by the brahmins, in thy simian folly 
thou hast presumed to address me thus, who am filled with 
good-will towards thee. 
" This earth belongs to the Ikshwakus, together with its 
mountains, forests and woods and they have jurisdiction over 
the wild beasts, birds and men. It is ruled by the virtuous 
Bharata, who is fixed in his duty and fully conversant with 
the law, with the proper means to acquisition of wealth and the 
right pursuit of pleasure and who is ever engaged in repressing 
evil-doers and recompensing the virtuous. It is the duty of 
a king to develop the art of government, be established in 
1 See Glossary under Dharma, Artha, Kama- 
310 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
virtue, be endowed with valour and know how to estimate 
time and place. We other princes carry out his righteous 
commands and range the whole earth in our desire to promote 
the law. When that Lion among Men, Bharata who cherishes 
equity, rules the entire world, who would dare to commit an 
injustice ? Fixed in our supreme duty, obedient to Bharata's 
will, in accord with the law, we put down transgression. Thou 
hast violated justice and thy conduct is condemned by all, lust 
being thine only mentor, ignoring as thou dost the royal path. 
" One who pursues the path of duty should regard his elder 
brother, the one who has given him birth and the one who 
instructs him in wisdom as his three fathers. Righteousness 
demands that a younger brother, a son and a virtuous disciple 
should be regarded as one's own offspring; even for the virtuous, 
duty is subtle and not easy to grasp, the soul residing in the 
heart alone knows what is right and wrong. 
" O Heedless Monkey, thou art surrounded by irresponsible 
simian counsellors, who are unable to control themselves, 
thus it is a case of the blind leading the blind, how canst thou 
learn from them ? I am speaking frankly to thee ; thou hadst 
no possible right to reproach me in my wrath. Learn now 
for what reason I struck thee down. 
" Thou hast acted in opposition to the spiritual law. While 
Sugriva yet lives, thou hast had marital relations with Ruma, 
who is thy sister-in-law. O Perverse Wretch, in order to 
satisfy thy lust, thou hast transgressed the law of righteousness 
and, O Monkey, since thou hast not respected thy brother's 
wife, this retribution has followed thee. I see no other means 
of restraining him who acts contrary to the interests of his 
subjects and does not conform to the social code but by punish ment, O King of the Monkeys ! 
" Being a warrior of an illustrious race, I am unable to brook 
thy villainy. The man who makes his daughter, his sister or 
his sister-in-law an object of lust, is punishable by death; 
this is the law ! 
" Though Bharata is the supreme monarch, we carry out 
his behests. How canst thou who hast broken the law, escape 
punishment ? He who tails to listen to his instructor in the 
form of the law, will be judged according to the law by the King. 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
" Bharata seeks to repress dissolute customs, and we who 
carry out his commands fully try to bring to justice those 
who, like thee, overstep the boundaries of the law, O Chief 
of the Monkeys. 
" Sugriva is my friend and equal to Lakshmana ; it is for 
the recovery of his wife and kingdom that he entered into a 
pact of friendship with me. In the presence of his ministers, 
I pledged my word ; how can a man like myself fail to meet 
these obligations ? 
" For all these reasons based on the law, thou canst judge 
for thyself, whether thy punishment is merited or no. That 
it is wholly just, thou wilt be forced to admit and, further, 
that one is bound to help a fnend if one acknowledges one's 
duty. Thou wouldst have done likewise if thou hadst followed 
the law. Two of the verses of Manu are specially devoted 
to these rules of conduct and are known to the authorities of 
the law ; I have been faithful to them. ' Those men who, 
having done wrong, submit to the penalty imposed by the king, 
are washed free from every stain and ascend to heaven like 
the good and those who do benevolent deeds. Further punish- 
ment or pardon exonerates the thief from his fault, but the 
king who does not put down vice himself assumes the guilt.' 
" My worthy ancestor Mandhata voluntarily underwent a 
terrible expiation for a monk who was guilty of an offence 
similar to thine whom he pardoned. Other monarchs, in their 
folly, have also done wrong, but have practiced penance ; it 
is by this means that passion is subdued. But enough of 
recriminations ! Thy death has been decreed in accordance 
with the spiritual law, O Lion among Monkeys ; we are not 
acting on personal impulse. 
" Listen to a further reason, O Valiant Bull among Monkeys; 
having grasped its significance, thou wilt no longer be able 
to reproach me. Neither did I follow mine own whim, nor 
did X act hastily, nor in anger. 
" Snares, nets and traps of every kind, either open or con cealed, are used to catch innumerable wild beasts, whether 
they be fleeing in terror, or, unafraid, are standing still. 
Whether these beasts are maddened with fear or no, they 
who feed on flesh run them through without pity while their 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
back is turned ; it does not seem to me that they are at fault. 
In this world, even royal Rishis, versed in their duty, indulge 
in the chase. This is why, with a single arrow, I struck thee 
down while engaged in combat with thy brother, O Monkey. 
What boots it, whether thou didst enter into combat with me 
or no, since thou art but a monkey. 
" Unquestionably it is kings who dispense the unwritten 
law and happiness in life, O Best of Monkeys ! One should 
never reproach them, nor address them disrespectfully, nor 
disregard them ; they are Gods who, assuming human form, 
dwell on earth ! But thou in thine ignorance of the law, 
dominated by anger, didst insult me, who have ever conformed 
to the established tradition of mine ancestors." 
Hearing Rama's words, Bali, deeply mortified, no longer 
sought to denounce the son of Raghu, the task of duty now 
having been rendered clear to him, and with joined palms 
that King of the Monkeys answered him, saying : — 
" Undoubtedly, O First of Men, what thou hast uttered is 
truth ! To gainsay an eminent personage is not permitted to 
one who is of common stock. It was in ignorance that I 
formerly addressed thee in disrespectful terms. Do not hold 
it against me, O Raghava, thou who art conversant with the 
significance and implication of things and devoted to the 
welfare of all. In the serenity of thine understanding, that 
nothing disturbs, the working out of cause and effect are known 
to thee. O Thou whose speech accords with justice and 
who art conversant with duty, rescue me who am fallen and 
the first of those to transgress the law." 
In a voice strangled with sobs, Bali, groaning, expressed 
himself with laboured effort, his eyes fixed on Rama, and 
resembled an elephant sinking in a morass. 
" I am not concerned for myself or Tara or my relatives, 
as much as for my virtuous son, Angada, of golden bracelets. 
Beholding me no more, that unfortunate one, who has been 
so cherished from childhood, will pine away with grief, like a 
pool whose waters have dried up. He is yet young and his 
understanding has not yet matured; he is my only son and 
most dear to me. Tara is his mother, O Rama; do thou 
protect that powerful Angada. 
213 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
" Show extreme kindness to Sugriva and Angada ; be their 
guardian and their guide, O Thou who art fully conversant 
with the laws of righteousness and unrighteousness. What 
thou wouldst perform for Bharata and Lakshmana, do for 
Sugriva and Angada. 
" See that Sugriva does not hold the sagacious Tara re sponsible for the fault I have committed or fail to treat her 
with respect. Under thy protection, let him govern the 
kingdom and, living obedient to thy counsels, he will attain 
heaven as well as rule the earth. As for myself, despite Tara's 
words, I wished to receive death at thine hands and came 
forth to enter into a duel with my brother Sugriva." 
Having spoken thus to Rama, the now humble King of the 
Monkeys became silent. 
Then Rama consoled Bali who was still fully conscious and 
spoke to him in a gentle voice, expressing the essence of 
spiritual and secular wisdom, saying : — 
" Have no anxiety either on our behalf or thine own, O 
Best of Monkeys. We know what should be done, above all 
in that which concerns thee. He who punishes the guilty 
and he who is guilty and pays the penalty have both fulfilled 
the purpose of cause and effect and therefore eschew calamity. 
Thus, thanks to the punishment that frees them from all taint, 
they regain their immaculate nature by the very path which 
paved the way to the penalty. 
" Put away grief, bewilderment and fear with which thine 
heart is filled ; thou canst not avoid thy fate, O Chief of the 
Monkeys. What Angada was to thee, O King of the Monkeys, 
he will be to Sugriva and myself; do not doubt it." 
The magnanimous Rama, intrepid in combat, uttered these 
words full of tenderness and benignity, in accord with righteous ness, and the dweller in the forest answered him humbly, 
saying: — 
" Pierced by thine arrow, my mind bewildered, I insulted 
thee without knowing what I was doing, O Lord, Thou whose 
immeasurable valour is equal to Mahendra's 1 Be pacified and 
pardon me, O Veritable Sovereign of the Monkeys." 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
CHAPTER 19 
Tarays Grief 
The mighty King of the Monkeys, who lay pierced by an 
arrow, did not reply further to Rama's judicious words. His 
limbs crushed by rocks, severly bruised by the trees that 
Sugriva had hurled at him, transfixed by Rama's shaft, at the 
point of death, he swooned away. 
Tara, learning that he had been struck down by an arrow 
discharged by Rama in the struggle and receiving the dis tressing tidings that her lord lay dying, with a troubled heart 
hastily emerged with her son from the rocky cavern. The 
monkeys who followed Angada, however, on seeing Rama 
with his bow, ran away in fear. 
Perceiving those monkeys fleeing in terror, like deer that 
scatter when the leader of the herd falls dead, Tara, though 
herself distraught, rallied the frightened monkeys, who sought 
to escape from Rama, as if his shafts had already been dis charged at them, and said : — 
" O Monkeys, you are the servants of that Lion among 
Monarchs ; why are you abandoning all and flying in disorder? 
Has Bali not been laid low by his wicked brother on account 
of the throne ? It was from afar that Rama loosed his far reaching arrow ! *' 
Thus did the consort of Bali speak, and those monkeys, 
who were able to change their shape at will, answered with 
one voice in words fitting to the occasion, saying : — 
" O Thou, who art the mother of a living son, return home 
and protect Angada ! Death, in the form of Rama, has struck 
Bali down and is bearing him away. Having launched a 
volley of immense trees and great rocks, Bali fell, borne down 
by arrows that resembled the lightning. Beholding that Lion 
among Monkeys overcome, him whose prowess was equal to 
IndrVs, the whole army of monkeys has taken to flight. Let 
the warriors save the city and install Angada as king ! The 
215 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
monkeys will obey Bali's son, who will take his place. If 
these conditions do not meet with thine approval, O Lady of 
agreeable looks, then the monkeys will seek other inaccessible 
retreats. Amongst those who live in the forest, some have no 
wives, others have common wives, but we fear those who 
have been deprived of their wives and still desire them."1 
As they were but a short distance away, that Lady of Sweet 
Smiles heard them and answered with dignity, saying : — 
" Since that Lion among Monkeys is dying, of what use to 
me is my son or the entire kingdom ? I shall seek out the feet 
of that magnanimous hero whom Rama has slain with a single 
arrow." 
Speaking thus, overcome with grief, beating her head and 
breast with her two hands and weeping, in her distress she 
rushed towards him and, still running, beheld her lord lying 
on the earth, he, the slayer of the foremost of monkeys, who 
never turned back in battle ; he, who was able to hurl great 
mountains, as Vasava discharges his thunderbolt with all the 
fury of a storm, roaring the while like a great mass of thunder, 
clouds; he whose valour was equal to Shakra's ; that hero 
pierced by a single arrow, lay on the earth, like the leader of 
antelopes a tiger has struck down for its prey, or like a place of 
sacrifice, held sacred by all, with its banners and its altars laid 
waste by Suparna on account of a serpent. 
Then Tara beheld the mighty Rama leaning on his bow, 
standing with his younger brother and the brother of her lord, 
and, beside herself with grief, she approached her spouse, 
who had fallen on the battlefield and, seeing him lying there, 
was overcome by distress and fell to the ground. Then, 
rising as if newly waking from sleep, seeing her lord caught 
in the noose of death, sobbing, she cried out : " O King ! " 
Her piercing cries, resembling an osprey's, moved Sugriva 
deeply, as did the presence of Angada also. 
1 A reference to Sugriva. 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
CHAPTER 20 
Her Lamentations 
Seeing her lord lying on the earth, pierced by that death dealing arrow discharged by Rama, Tara, whose face resembled 
the moon, approaching him, embraced him. At the sight of 
Bali, who lay like an elephant wounded by an arrow, that 
monkey resembling a huge mountain or an uprooted tree, Tara 
poured out her heart, torn with grief, in lamentation : — 
" O Thou who wert full of valour in combat ! O Hero ! O 
Best of Monkeys ! It is because of my recent importunities 
that thou wilt not now speak to me ! Rise, O Lion among 
Monkeys and rest on a comfortable couch ! Those great 
monarchs, thine equals, do not sleep on the earth ; or is the 
earth thy cherished love, since even in dying thou dost lie 
by her and scornest me ? 
" Without doubt, O Warrior, thanks to thy great exploits, 
thou hast founded another and more glorious Kishkindha in 
heaven ! The pleasures we once shared in the woods and in 
the fragrant bowers are henceforth at an end. I am bereft 
of all joy and hope and sunk in a sea of sorrow, since thou, the 
King of Kings, art returning to the five elements.1 My heart 
must be made of stone, since, seeing thee lying on the earth, 
grief does not cause it to break into a thousand pieces. Thou 
didst steal away Sugriva's consort and sent him into exile ; 
it is the fruit of this double fault that thou art now expiating, 
O Chief of the Monkeys ! 
"Intent on thy welfare, I submitted to thy senseless re proaches ; I, who in the desire to be of service to thee gave 
thee nought but wise counsel, O Indra of Monkeys ! Now, 
O Proud Lord, beguiled by their youthful and seductive beauty, 
thou art moving the hearts of the Apsaras. It is irrevocable fate 
which this day has put an end to thine existence ; thou whom 
Sugriva could not vanquish hast resigned thyself to its power ! 
1 The body being said to rejoin the elements at death. 
217 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
" Having without cause struck down Bali who was engaged 
in combat with another, though it is censurable, Kakutstha 
has no regrets. I who, till now, did not know distress, de prived of thy support, at the height of misfortune, must pass 
my life as a widow. What will the fate of Angada be, the 
object of my tenderness, a valiant though youthful prince 
accustomed to pleasure, now at the mercy of his paternal uncle, 
who is filled with anger against us ? Look long on thy virtuous 
Sire, O My Beloved Son ! Soon thou shalt see him no more. 
" And Thou, O comfort thy son, give him counsel, em bracing his brow before thou departest on thy last journey ! 
Assuredly Rama has accomplished a great feat in striking thee 
down, but he is guiltless, for all he did was to obey Sugriva. 
O Sugriva, rejoice, regain possession of Ruma and enjoy the 
kingdom without hindrance ; thy brother, thine adversary, is 
wounded unto death. 
" But Thou, O My Beloved, why dost thou not answer my 
complaint ? See, thy numerous and lovely wives surround thee, 
0 King of the Monkeys." 
Hearing Tara's lamentations, those unfortunate women, 
placing Angada in their midst, emitted pitiful cries on every 
side. Then Tara spoke once again, saying : — 
" How canst thou abandon Angada, O Thou whose powerful 
arms are decorated with bracelets, and go forth on thy last 
journey thus ? It is not meet to abandon a son who possesses 
thy virtues and is aimiable and handsome. If inadvertently 
1 have offended thee, O long-armed Hero, then forgive me ! 
0 Chief of the Monkey Tribe, I lay my head at thy feet." 
Thus did Tara with the other queens lament bitterly at the 
side of her lord and that lady of matchless beauty resolved to 
die of hunger lying on the earth at Bali's side. 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
CHAPTER 21 
HanumarCs Speech 
Hanuman, however, the Leader of the Monkeys, gently tried 
to console Tara, who was lying on the earth like a star fallen 
from the heavens, and said : — 
" The fruits of all that is done under the impulse of virtue or 
vice must be plucked after death, whether they be good or 
evil. O Unhappy One, for whom dost thou weep ? O 
Unfortunate One, whom dost thou bewail ? For whose life, 
that bubble, should one mourn? Henceforth the youthful 
Angada should be the object of thy solicitude, since he alone 
survives. From now on, thou shouldst concern thyself on his 
account and render him fitting service. Thou knowest well 
how uncertain is the future of all beings ; therefore it is for 
thee to perform noble deeds here, who art conversant with 
thy duty and who art a stranger to common acts ! 
" He under whom hundreds and thousands of monkeys 
lived has now reached the uttermost bourne of his destiny, 
and since he fulfilled the injunctions laid down by the law and 
was distinguished for his impartiality, his liberality and bis 
tolerance, he now dwells among the virtuous conquerors. 
Why shouldst thou mourn for him ? O Irreproachable One, 
thou hast now become the protectress of all the leading monkeys, 
thy son, and also this kingdom of the apes and bears. Little 
by little do thou console these two (Sugriva and Angada) who 
are afflicted, and under thy tutelage, O Fair Lady, let Angada 
rule the earth. 
"To ensure the future and reflect on the present is the 
whole duty of a prince ; it is so decreed by destiny. Angada 
should be installed as King of the Monkeys and be anointed. 
Seeing thy son seated on the throne, thy peace of mind will 
be restored." 
Hearing these words, Tara, who was torn with grief on 
account of her lord, answered Hanuman, who stood at her 
side, saying :— 
219 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
" I would rather cling to the body of this hero than a hundred 
sons like Angada. I am not able to govern the monkeys nor 
is he; such a duty devolves on his paternal uncle, Sugriva. 
O Hanuman, it is not for me to confer the kingdom on Angada ; 
the true relative of the son in succession to Ins father is the uncle, 
who stands as a second father to him and not the mother, O 
Foremost of Monkeys. There is nought better for me in this 
world or in the next than to take refuge near the King of the 
Monkeys, my lord ; it is fitting for me to share the bed of him 
who has fallen facing the foe." 
CHAPTER 22 
Bali's last Words 
Bali, whose breathing was scarcely perceptible and who was 
sighing faintly, glanced round and discerned his younger 
brother, Sugriva, before him. Addressing him whose victory 
had assured him of the possession of the dominion of the 
monkeys, he spoke in clear and affectionate tones, saying : — 
" O Sugriva, do not approach me with any evil intent, I 
who was carried away by a fatal loss of understanding. It 
would seem to me, O My Friend, that it was not our destiny 
to live at peace with one another ; though friendship is natural 
between brothers, yet with us it has been different. To-day, 
thou wilt regain the kingdom of the forest-dwellers, whereas 
I, mark well, am leaving this world and going to the region of 
death. Not only am I abandoning in an instant, life, kingdom 
and great prosperity but also a reputation without stain. At 
this supreme moment, I make an appeal to thee and, difficult 
though it is, it must be done, O Valiant Prince. 
" See, stretched on the earth, his face bathed in tears, 
Angada, who is worthy of happiness, brought up in luxury 
and, though a child, possessing nought that pertains to child hood ! Do thou protect him from all peril, he who is my son 
and dearer to me than life, the issue of my loins and whom 
I now abandon, though he does not merit abandonment. Be 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
his father, his benefactor and his guardian in all circumstances 
and in danger be his refuge, as I have ever been, O Chief 
of the Monkeys ! 
" Born of Tara, that fortunate prince, thine equal in valour, 
shall precede thee in the destruction of the titans. That 
youthful Angada, Tara's son, that valiant hero, whose prowess 
is great, will manifest it in deeds of valour worthy of me. 
Further, when the daughter of Sushena (Tara), of profound 
discernment and conversant with future happenings, bids thee 
saying : * Do this, it is right ', do so without hesitation. 
There is no presentiment of Tara's that does not come to pass. 
" Whatever Raghava proposes, do thou carry out with the 
same resolution ; it were wrong to disobey him and he will 
punish thee for thy contempt. Take this golden chain, O 
Sugriva ; the glorious Shri who dwells in it will leave it at 
my death."1 
Hearing Bali's affectionate and brotherly words, Sugriva was 
bereft of joy and grew sad, resembling the moon in eclipse. 
Pacified by Bali and anxious to act in a fitting manner, on his 
brother's request, he took off the golden chain. 
Having thus made over this mark of royalty, Bali, at the 
point of death, gazing on his son Angada, who stood before 
him, addressed him tenderly, saying : — 
" Do thou act in a manner fitting to the time and place. 
Suffer pleasure and pain with equanimity ; in joy and sorrow 
be obedient to Sugriva. Assuredly, O Long-armed Warrior, 
thou hast ever been cherished by me, but it is not by living 
thus that thou wilt earn Sugriva's respect. Do not ally thyself 
with those who are not his friends, still less his foes, O Conqueror 
of Thine Enemies ! Be loyal to Sugriva, thy master, with thy 
senses fully controlled and ever be attentive to his interests. 
Be not inordinately attached to any nor hold any in contempt ; 
both extremes are a great error, therefore pursue the middle 
course." With these words, suffering intensely from the arrow, 
his eyes staring wildly, his great teeth chattering, Bali expired. 
Then a great tumult arose among the monkeys, thus deprived 
of their leader, and all the forest dwellers gave vent to lamenta tions, saying : — 
1 Shri or Lakshmi, the Consort of Vishnu and Goddess of Prosperity. 
321 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
" Henceforth Kishkiiidha is nought but a desert, the King 
of Monkeys having ascended to heaven ; his gardens are but 
a wilderness, as are the mountains and the woods. That Lion 
of Monkeys has passed away ; the forest-dwellers are stripped 
of their glory. 
" He engaged the illustrious and long-armed Golaba, the 
Gandharva, in a terrible battle lasting ten years and yet another 
five ; that struggle did not cease day or night ; then in the 
sixteenth year, Golaba was struck down, that foolhardy one 
falling under the blows of Bali of strong teeth. How has he 
who protected us from all peril fallen in his turn ? 
" That valiant Leader of Monkeys being slain, the forest dwellers will not be able to find any safe place of refuge, like 
kine in the midst of a lion-infested forest." 
On hearing these words, Tara, who was submerged in an 
ocean of grief, gazing on the face of her dead lord, fell to the 
earth, embracing Bali like a creeper clinging to an uprooted tree. 
CHAPTER 23 
Tara weeps over the Body of Bali 
Thereupon, smelling the face1 of that King of the Monkeys, 
Tara, who was renowned throughout the whole world, addressed 
her dead consort, saying : — 
" Not having followed my counsel, O Warrior, thou art now 
stretched on the rough, hard and stony ground. Hast thou 
then chosen the earth as thy love rather than myself, since 
thou now liest embracing it, whereas to me thou dost not 
utter a single word ? 
" Alas ! Fate has favoured Sugriva, that valiant One, whose 
noble exploits will now cause him to be regarded as a hero. 
The Leaders of the Bears and Monkeys pay homage to thy 
prowess ! Hearing their cries of distress and those of the 
1 A traditional salutation. 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
unfortunate Angada and myself, why dost thou not wake? 
Having been slain in combat, thou sleepest on that hard bed, 
the place where formerly thine enemies rested struck down 
by thy blows. O My Beloved, thou art the offshoot of a 
glorious race renowned for its heroism ; thou, for whom war 
was but a sport, art gone, leaving me alone without a protector, 
O Proud Monarch ! Nay, a wise man should never give his 
daughter in marriage to a warrior. Mark how I, wedded to 
a Kshatriya, am about to die, having been made a widow. 
My pride is humbled, and from this moment the path to ever lasting life is closed to me. I am submerged in an ocean of 
grief without ground or bourne ! How hard is my heart that, 
even seeing my dead lord, it does not break into a thousand 
fragments — my friend, my lord, naturally dear to me, that hero, 
who, falling on the field of honour under the blows of a warrior 
more powerful than he, has returned to the five elements. 
The woman who loses her consort, even if she have sons 
and be endowed with wealth, is yet a widow, say the wise. 
0 Hero ! Thou art lying enveloped in the blood that flows from 
thy limbs, as thou wert formerly with the scarlet silk of thy 
couch. Dust and gore covers thy body on every side, so that 
1 cannot hold thee in mine arms, O Bull amongst Plavagas. 
" To-day, Sugriva has achieved the purpose for which he 
engaged thee in this formidable struggle. A single arrow 
discharged by Rama freed him from all fear. That shaft that 
pierced thine heart now prevents me from embracing thy 
body and I can but gaze on thee, who art rejoining the five 
elements." 
At that moment the General Nala drew out from the corpse 
the arrow which resembled an angry snake issuing from a 
mountain cave and glittered as he withdrew it, like the sun 
whose rays have been intercepted by the peak of a mountain. 
Thereupon streams of blood instantly began to flow again 
from those wounds on every side, resembling the water of a 
river that is stained by the sandstone washed down from a 
mountain. 
Tara, wiping off the dust of combat with which he was 
soiled, washed her brave lord with the tears that welled up 
in her eyes, while she gazed lovingly down on him lying there, 
223 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
pierced by Rama's arrow, his limbs all covered with blood. 
Then, addressing her son Angada, whose eyes were red, she 
said to him : — 
" Behold the bitter end of thy sire, O My Son ! How tragic 
it is ! This is the outcome of an hostility born of perfidy ! 
This body, gleaming like the sun about to rise, has entered 
the region of death. Embrace that proud monarch, O My 
Son ! " 
At these words, Angada rising, seized hold of the feet of 
his father with his rounded arms, saying : — " It is I, Angada ! 
When I embraced thee formerly thou didst say * Live long, 
O My Son ', why dost thou not speak to me thus now ? " 
Then Tata said : — " Here I stand beside thine inanimate 
body, like a cow with its calf beside a bull that a lion has just 
slain ! I do not see the gift that the King of the Gods bestowed 
on thee when gratified by his victory over the Asura, that 
glorious chain of gold, why is this ? Thou shalt not be robbed 
of the insignia of royalty even after death, O Proud Monarch, 
for the King of the Mountains continues to glow after the 
sun has set. 
" Thou didst not follow my sage counsel and I was unable 
to restrain thee. Thy death on the battlefield has brought 
about mine own and my son's also. The Goddess of Prosperity1 
has renounced both thee and me." 
chapter 24 
Sugriva's Remorse 
Seeing Tara submerged in the fathomless ocean of grief, Bali's 
younger brother was filled with remorse for his tragic end and 
overcome with distress, his face bathed in tears, in her presence, 
slowly approached Rama surrounded by his attendants. 
Raghava, bearing all the marks of royalty, stood apart, full 
of dignity and majesty, bearing his bow and arrows, which 
resembled serpents, in his hands. 
1 Lakshmi who was said to have resided in the golden chain that Indra 
had bestowed on Bali. 
224 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
Then Sugriva addressed him, saying : — " In accord 
with thy promise, O Indra among Men, thou didst accom plish this deed, the results of which are here made manifest. 
In the midst of my triumph, O Prince, in the presence of the 
slain, my spirit is troubled. On account of the dead monarch, 
his chief queen is wailing piteously, the city is giving vent to 
lamentation and Angada is plunged in affliction ; all this, 
O Rama, robs sovereignty of any delight for me. 
'* At first, anger, resentment and extreme vexation caused 
me to view the death of my brother with satisfaction, but soon, 
in the presence of the corpse of that King of the Monkeys, 
a great sadness seized me, O First of the House of Ikshwaku. 
Now it is made clear to me that it would have been better 
to continue to live as I formerly did on the lofty summit of 
the Rishyamuka mountain, than slay my brother. 
" ' I have no desire to destroy thee ! Begone ! * were the 
words that magnanimous warrior addressed to me. This 
utterance was worthy of him, O Rama, and I, by killing him, 
have acted vilely. How can any, even if he be devoid of 
virtue, approve the murder of a brother or balance the happiness 
experienced on attaining a kingdom with the grief suffered 
by his death. Unquestioningly he had no intention of slaying 
me, being too great of soul, but in my perversity I have robbed 
him of his life. 
" In the struggle, when, under the blows of the trees, I was 
about to succumb and cried out, he at once reassured me, 
saying : ' Do not repeat thine impudence ; go hence ! ' 
" He was ever filled with brotherly affection, nobility and 
justice, whereas I was full of anger, envy and the natural 
characteristics of a monkey. 
" That which should be excluded from one's thoughts, 
feelings, desires and conduct is what I have harboured in 
murdering my brother, a crime equal to the slaying of Vish warupa by Indra. But Indra's guilt was shared by the earth, 
the trees and the waters as well as women, whereas who is 
able to share mine ? Who would wish to bear the weight of 
the sin of a Deer of the Trees ? 
" I am not worthy to be held in honour by the people, nor 
to be allied to the kingdom, still less do I merit the throne, 
225 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
having committed such an infamous deed that entails the 
destruction of one of mine own race. 
" I have perpetrated a vile and ignoble act, condemned by 
the whole world. An overwhelming sorrow fills me, as torren tial rain fills a ravine. I am crushed by the bank of a river 
that has been trodden down by an intoxicated elephant, whose 
back and tail are the murder of my blood-brother, whose 
trunk, eyes, head and tusks are the remorse bearing me away. 
" This sin, the weight of which is intolerable, O Prince, 
O Son of the House of Raghu, has destroyed all that is best in 
my heart, as fire consumes gold, leaving only dross. The 
company of the great leaders of monkeys, O Prince, are half 
dead through my fault and also on account of the violent 
despair of Angada. 
'* Rare indeed is a son as obedient as Angada, but a son is 
easily acquired ; where however in the world can one akin to 
a blood brother be found, O Hero ? To-day, if Angada, that 
Chief of Warriors, and his mother live, she, though overcome 
with grief will surely care for him, for bereft of him she would 
die. As for me, I wish to enter the blazing pyre in order to 
regain the affection of my brother and his son. 
" Those leaders of monkeys will set out in search of Sita 
whenever thou commandest. O Son of that Indra among 
Men, I, the Destroyer of my Race, who am no longer worthy 
to live after committing this outrage, bid thee farewell, O Rama." 
Hearing the words of the wretched Sugriva, Bali's brother, 
that noble descendant of the House of Raghu, Rama, began 
to weep, he, the Destroyer of Hostile Armies, for his mind was 
troubled. Thereafter, glancing here and there, that support 
of the earth, the protector of the world, Rama, in the midst 
of his distress, observed Tara groaning under the load of her 
affliction. 
The chief queen of that Lion among Monkeys, of lovely eyes, 
was lying beside her lord, whom she held in her arms. Then 
the first of the ministers raised up that valiant consort of the 
King of the Monkeys, and she, trembling as they separated her 
from her lord, whom she was embracing, beheld Rama, whose 
radiance equalled the sun's, standing with his bow and arrows 
in his hand. 
226 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
Adorned with all the distinguishing marks of royalty, that 
large-eyed prince, whom she had never yet beheld, that first 
of heroes, was recognized by Tara, whose eyes resembled a 
doe's, and she reflected ' It is Kakutstha ! ' 
Then that noble and unfortunate lady, who had so suddenly 
been plunged into affliction, tottering, approached the one 
who was the equal of Indra, inaccessible and all powerful. 
The venerable Tara, her beautiful frame wasted with grief, 
drawing near to the pure-souled Rama, who by his valour 
ever attained his end in combat, addressed him thus : — 
" Thou art of immeasurable courage, unapproachable, master 
of thy senses and of supreme faith ; thy fame is imperishable, 
thou art full of wisdom and the support of the earth ! Thine 
eyes are the colour of blood ; thou bearest a bow and arrows 
in thine hand ; thou art endowed with great strength and 
strong limbs ; thou hast renounced the concerns of the body 
in this world in order to enjoy divine attributes. The shaft 
with which thou didst pierce my beloved lord, now use to 
destroy me also. When I am dead, I shall be reunited to 
him; without me, Bali will never be happy, O Hero. Far 
from me, even in heaven, amidst the red-haired Apsaras, 
whose locks are braided in various ways and who are gor geously attired, he will not be happy, O Thou whose eyes 
resemble the pure petals of the lotus. 
" Thou knowest well that he who is separated from his 
loved one is wretched ! On account of this, slay me, so that 
Bali shall not suffer in mine absence. If, in the greatness of 
thy soul, thou shouldst reflect * I will not be guilty of slaying 
a woman ', say to thyself, * She is part of Bali himself ' and 
strike me down. It will not be a woman whom thou hast put 
to death, O Son of that Indra among Men ! By virtue of the 
law and according to the different Vedic texts, women are not 
other than the higher self of man. Therefore the wise say 
that the gift of a woman is assuredly the greatest of gifts. 
In this wise thou dost give me back to my dear one in order 
that I may fulfil my duty to him, O Warrior ; by this offering 
thou shalt not incur the sin of slaying me. 
" Filled with sorrow, bereft of support, left desolate, thou 
shouldn'st not spare my life. The more so that far from that 
227 Q 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
sagacious Prince of Monkeys, whose joyful gait resembled an 
elephant's, with his glorious golden chain, the insigna of 
supreme majesty, I shall not live long, O Prince." 
Thus spoke Tara, and in order to consoleher, the magnanimous 
Lord addressed her with wisdom and understanding, saying : — 
" O Consort of a Hero, do not grieve ! The whole universe 
is ordered by the creator ; similarly it is established that the 
sum of good and evil is ordained by Him, nor do the Three 
Worlds, obedient to His will, transgress His fixed laws. Because 
of this, thou wilt attain supreme happiness and thy son become 
heir-apparent to the kingdom. The Lord has ordained this 
in the order of things ; the consorts of heroes do not complain." 
Thus comforted by the magnanimous and powerful victor 
of his foes, the wife of the valiant Bali, the gorgeously-attired 
Tara, ceased to lament. 
CHAPTER 25 
Bali's Funeral Rites 
Full of compassion for Sugriva's distress and that experienced 
by Tara and Angada, Kakutstha, who was accompanied by 
Lakshmana, in order to console them, said : — 
" It is not by weeping that the happiness of the departed 
is assured ! Cany out your immediate duty without delay ! 
By shedding tears, you have observed the demands of social 
convention; it is vain to seek to avoid fate. Time1 is the 
driving force that orders the world's events ; it is Time that 
creates all conditions here below. None is the real agent of 
action and none truly causes action to take place. The world 
abides by virtue of the dictates of its own inner being. Time 
is its source, stay and goal. Time does not overstep its own 
bounds, nor does it suffer decrease. Self-dependent, there is 
neither kinship nor friendship in it, nor is it restrained by any, 
nor has it any cause. Assuredly, he who sees clearly is aware 
of the working of Time. Duty, prosperity and pleasure are 
subject to Time ; it is on this account that Bali attained his 
1 Time in the form o( Destiny. 
228 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
own true state. The King of the Plavagas has reaped the 
fruit of his works, acquired by his merits, through his integrity 
and liberality. He has attained heaven on account of his 
observance of duty and he has taken possession of it by sacri ficing his life. The Sovereign of the Monkeys has reached 
the highest state. Thou hast mourned long enough ; now 
perform the last rites." 
When Rama ceased speaking, Lakshmana, the Slayer of 
His Foes, spoke sagely to Sugriva, who was distraught, saying: — 
" O Sugriva, inaugurate the obsequies without delay with 
the assistance of Tara and Angada. Issue the order that a 
large quantity of dry wood be gathered together with the 
sacred sandalwood, for the funeral pyre. Banish indecision ; 
this city depends on thee. Let Angada bring garlands and 
robes of every kind, together with butter, oil, perfumes and 
all that is requisite. 
" O Tara, do thou find a palanquin without delay ; prompt 
action is always praiseworthy, the more so at such an hour. 
Let those who are skilful and strong, accustomed to palanquins, 
hold themselves in readiness to bear Bah away." 
Having spoken thus to Sugriva, the on of Sumitra, Laksh mana, the Slayer of His Foes, took up his position beside his 
brother. 
Hearing Lakshmana's command, Tara with a beating heart 
hastened to the cave, bent on finding a litter, and soon returned 
with one borne by strong monkeys to whom the work was 
familiar. 
It was indeed magnificent, well-cushioned and resembling a 
chariot, the sides being marvellously decorated and enriched 
with carved wooden figures. Resting on wonderful supports, 
it was gorgeously fitted like a palace belonging to the Siddhas 
and was furnished with windows and balconies that were 
spacious and embellished with carvings, a work of extreme 
artistry. Large and well constructed of wood from the 
mountain-side, priceless ornaments, strings of pearls and 
splendid crowns gave it a dazzling appearance and it was 
covered with clay, painted red and sprinkled with sandal-paste. 
Festooned with wreaths of lotuses, shining like the dawn, it 
was strewn with innumerable flowers. 
229 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Beholding it, Rama said to Lakshmana : — " Let Bali's body 
be placed upon it with all speed and let the funeral ceremony 
proceed." Then Sugriva, weeping, assisted by Angada, 
raised Bali's body and placed it on the litter. Having laid 
the corpse on its couch, he covered it with ornaments of every 
kind together with wreaths and cloths. Thereafter, Sugriva, 
the King of the Monkeys, commanded that the last rites of 
his noble brother should be carried out on the banks of a river. 
The great monkey leaders preceded the litter, scattering 
jewels of every kind in profusion. Every honour due to a 
king of this world was offered by the Vanaras to their lord that 
day. 
Then the funeral rites began immediately, Angada, 
Tara and the others surrounding the master they had lost. 
On their side, the women who had lived subject to his authority 
gathered together crying : " O Hero, O Hero ", thus bewailing 
the death of their lord. 
All the wives of Bali, who had been widowed, with Tara 
at their head, accompanied their deceased sovereign, lamenting 
pitifully. Their cries were heard in the depth of the forest 
and re-echoed through the woods and among the rocks on 
every side. Then on a deserted sandbank surrounded by 
water, formed by a torrent issuing from the mountain, innumer able monkeys, inhabitants of the forest, constructed a pyre, 
and those excellent bearers reverently lowered the litter from 
their shoulders and all stood round, plunged in mourning. 
Seeing her lord lying on the funeral bed, Tara, taking his 
head in her lap, a prey to extreme grief, began to lament : — 
" O Illustrious and Mighty Prince, O My Dear One, look 
on me ! Why dost thou not cast a single glance on all those 
who are plunged in sorrow ? Thou smilest even in death, 
O Noble Hero, and thy countenance resembles the rays of 
the rising sun ! Death, in the guise of Rama, has struck thee 
down, O Monkey ! A single arrow discharged by him on the 
field of battle has made us all widows. Thy wives, present 
here, who no longer know how to leap, O Indra among Kings, 
have come this painful road step by step on foot, is it not 
known to thee ? Dost thou no longer love these women whose 
radiant looks resemble the moon ? Why dost thou not look 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
on Sugriva, O King of the Monkeys ? Here are thy counsellors, 
O Sovereign, also Tara and the others and the leading citizens 
surrounding thee, all plunged in grief. Dismiss thy ministers 
as thou wert wont to do, O Vanquisher of thy Foes, and we 
will go to the woods with thee in happy dalliance." 
Then the women, themselves overwhelmed with affliction, 
caused Tara to rise. 
Assisted by Sugriva, Angada, sobbing, bore his sire to the 
funeral pyre, his mind distraught with grief, and, igniting the 
flames according to the traditional rites, keeping his father on 
his right hand, he circumambulated him, sorrowfully watching 
him setting forth on his last journey. 
Having performed the ritual acts in honour of Bali, that 
Bull among Monkeys, accompanied by Sugriva and Tara, 
performed his ablutions. 
Associating himself with Sugriva's loss, the mighty Kakutstha, 
sharing his grief, officiated at the funeral rites. 
The body of Bali, chief of heroes, full of glory, whom that 
descendant of Ikshwaku had slain with his marvellous arrow, 
having been cremated, Sugriva, whose splendour resembled 
a clear flame, approached Rama and Lakshmana who accom panied him. 
CHAPTER 26 
Sugriva is installed as King 
The chief ministers encircled Sugriva, who was clad in dripping 
garments and overcome with grief. Approaching the illus trious Rama of imperishable exploits, he stood before him with 
joined palms like the Sages before the Grand-sire of the World. 
Then Hanuman, the son of Maruta, who resembled a moun tain of gold, his face shining like the rising sun, addressed him 
with profound reverence in the following words : — 
" May it please thee, O Kakutstha, to reinstate Sugriva in 
the vast and impregnable kingdom of his mighty ancestors. 
231 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Be gracious unto him, 0 Lord, and permit him to return to 
his magnificent capital. May he regulate his affairs with the 
co-operation of his many friends. 
" After the purificatory bath of perfumes and aromatic 
herbs of every kind, he will pay thee homage and bestow gifts 
and garlands and precious gems, scents and herbs on thee. 
Thou shouldst enter this marvellous cave, carved out of the 
mountain, and unite these monkeys with a master, thus making 
them happy ! " 
Hearing Hanuman's words, Rama, that Destroyer of Hostile 
Warriors, answered him with wisdom and eloquence, saying : — 
" Most beloved Hanuman, in accordance with the behests 
of my sire I may not enter a village or city for fourteen years. 
Let Sugriva, that Bull among Monkeys enter that prosperous 
and glorious city and be installed as king according to the 
traditional rites ! " 
Having spoken thus to Hanuman, Rama said to Sugriva : — 
" Thou who art conversant with thy duty, proclaim that noble 
and valiant hero, Angada, heir-apparent to the kingdom. 
He is the eldest son of thy elder brother and equal to him in 
courage ; Angada has a valiant heart and deserves to be thine 
heir. It is now Shravana, the first month of the rainy season,1 
that brings the floods ; it is no time for military exploits therefore 
return to thy capital. As for me, I shall live on the mountain 
with Lakshmana. This cavern, carved out of the rock, is 
large and airy and possesses a lake whose crystalline waters 
abound in lotuses of every kind. When the month of Kartika* 
has come, make ready to slay Ravana, this is our pact ; meantime, 
O Friend, return to thine home and receive the royal anointing, 
thus gratifying thy friends." 
Thus dismissed by Rama, Sugriva, that Bull among Monkeys 
penetrated into the enchanting city of Kishkindha of which 
Bali had been the supreme lord. 
Following their sovereign, thousands of monkeys prostrated 
themselves, touching the dust with their foreheads, and Sugriva, 
full of valour, called on them to rise, addressing his subjects 
with affection. 
1 July-August. 
■ October-November. 
232 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
That mighty warrior thereafter entered his brother's private 
apartments and, having come there, the powerful hero, Sugriva, 
that Bull of Forest-dwellers, was proclaimed king by his friends, 
as was formerly the God of a Thousand Eyes. 
Then they brought him a white canopy, decorated with gold, 
and two magnificent whisks of yak's tails with gleaming golden 
handles, also gems of every kind and grain and grass, together 
with blossoming branches, flowers and rich stuffs, white 
unguents, fragrant garlands, wild flowers and those that grow 
in water, sacred sandalwood, varied and numerous perfumes, 
roasted grain, gold, panic seed, honey, butter, curds, a tiger 
skin and wonderfully wrought sandals. 
Thereafter six lovely young girls, bringing scents, tallow and 
red and yellow pigments,1 entered joyfully and distributed 
gems, raiment and food among the foremost of the twice-born. 
Those versed in the sacred formulas then prepared heaps of 
kusha grass and, igniting a fire, poured out the Soma, purified 
by the recitation of traditional prayers. Then Sugriva, 
seated on a gorgeous golden-based throne, covered with rich 
draperies and a magnificent three-tiered baldaquin, decorated 
with marvellous garlands, facing the East, was enthroned. 
Those Lions among the Forest-dwellers had visited the banks 
of rivers and streams, far and wide, as well as the sacred places 
and the seas, in order to draw pure water which they brought 
back in pitchers of gold. 
Employing golden vases and the polished horns of bulls, Gaja, 
Gavaksha, Gavaya, Sharabha, Gandhamadana, Mainda, Dvivida, 
Hanuman and Jambavan in accordance with the tradition laid 
down in the scriptures and on the instructions of the Sages, 
poured the clear and fragrant water over Sugriva, as formerly 
the Vasus bathed Vasava of a Thousand Eyes. 
When the enthronement was completed, all those illustrious 
leaders of the monkeys raised a shout of joy again and again. 
Thereafter, in order to follow Rama's counsel, Sugriva, the 
King of the Monkeys, embracing Angada, installed him as heir apparent. 
Angada received the investiture, and those magnanimous 
Plavagas acclaimed him crying "Excellent! Excellent!", 
1 Pigments. Yellow Gorocala used for Tilak ; red Manahshila, a 
form of red arsenic. 
233 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
praising Sugriva and the great-souled Rama and Lakshmana, 
All were overjoyed on this auspicious occasion ; a large and 
merry crowd, fully satisfied, filled the streets, carrying banners 
and standards in the enchanting city of Kishkindha, which 
had been hollowed out of the mountain. 
Having informed the illustrious Rama of the great coronation 
ceremony and being reunited with his consort, Ruma, the 
heroic leader of the monkey army took possession of his kingdom, 
like the Chief of the Immortals. 
chapter 27 
Rama describes Prasravana 
The monkey Sugriva, having been crowned king, returned to 
Kishkindha, whilst Rama retired to the Mountain Prasravana. 
That mountain resounded with the cries of tigers and deer, 
and the roaring of the lions that frequented it was heard day 
and night; bushes, diverse creepers and innumerable trees 
were to be seen everywhere. It was inhabited by bears, lynxes 
and many kinds of monkeys and resembled a mass of clouds 
sparkling with light and beauty. On the summit was a large and 
spacious cave, which Rama, who was accompanied by Saumitri, 
chose as a dwelling for himself. 
Having contracted an alliance with Sugriva, Rama, the 
irreproachable descendant of the House of Raghu, addressed 
his brother Lakshmana, the increaser of his delight, in appro priate and significant words, saying : — 
" O Saumitri, Destroyer of Thy Foes ! We should establish 
ourselves in this agreeable rocky cavern during the rainy 
season. This peak, the most lofty on this mountain, is en chanting, O Prince ! White, black and dun-coloured crags 
adorn it and metals of every kind abound, while its rivers 
swarm with frogs ; it is filled with innumerable trees and charm ing creepers, where a variety of birds warble and splendid 
peacocks can be heard ; Malati, Kunda, Sinduvara, Shirishaka, 
Kadamba, Arjuna and Sarja trees embellish it with their blossom. 
" Here is a lovely pool, festooned with flowering lotus, 
adjoining the cave, O Prince. Where the rock is hollowed out, 
334 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
it inclines to the north east, which will make our stay more 
agreeable, whilst on the west it is higher and we shall be sheltered 
from the winds. At the entrance, O Saumitri, is a smooth 
black stone like a piece of antimony washed in oil ; to the 
north, O Friend, die crest of the mountain is magnificent 
and looks like a mass of polished collyrium or a stationary cloud. 
To the south, it stretches like a white veil, resembling Mount 
Kailasha, rich in metals, which give it a dazzling appearance. 
" Observe this river of translucent water like unto Jahnavi 
on the Mount Trikuta ! Candana, Tilaka, Sala, Tamala, 
Atimuktaka, Padmaka, Sarala and Ashoka trees embellish it; 
Vanira, Timida, Bakula, Ketaka, Hintala, Tinisha, Nipa, 
Vetasa and Kritamalaka trees grow on its banks, adorning it 
on every side, like a woman attired in rich raiment and precious 
gems. 
" Innumerable flocks of birds till it with their various notes 
and waterfowl enliven it with their amorous frolics. The 
river has created enchanting islands which are frequented by 
swans and cranes ; its smiling aspect calls to mind a beautiful 
woman wearing innumerable ornaments. Here it is carpeted 
with blue lotuses, there shining with the red and in the distance 
white water-lilies may be seen. Ducks sport here in their 
hundreds, whilst peacocks and curlews fill this river, full of 
charm and colour, with their cries, and groups of sages 
frequent it. 
" See how the Sandal and Kadubha trees grow in clusters 
of five, as if planned by an intelligent will. Ah! What an 
enchanting spot ! O Saumitri, Thou Scourger of Thy Foes, 
let us enjoy it to the full and make our retreat a happy one. 
Kishkindha too is not far from here, that marvellous city of 
Sugriva's, where songs and the sound of musical instruments 
are heard, O Most Illustrious of Conquerors ! It is the monkey 
warriors sporting to the sound of drums. 
" Having recovered his consort and his kingdom, that 
monarch of the monkeys, Sugriva, surrounded by his com panions, is assuredly celebrating his return to full prosperity." 
With these words, Rama with Lakshmana took up their abode 
on the Mountain Prasravana, where there were innumerable 
caves and woods. 
235 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIK1 
Yet despite the beauty and abundance of fruits, Rama was 
unable to find the least pleasure there. Remembering the 
woman who had been torn from him and who was as dear to 
him as his very life's breath, the more now, when the moon was 
rising over the summit of the mountain, he was unable to sleep, 
passing the nights on the couch, sighing, his spirit troubled, 
a prey to constant grief. 
Seeing Rama desolate and a victim to profound melancholy, 
Lakshmana, who was equally afflicted, addressed him in 
affectionate words, saying : — " Cease to mourn, O Hero, thou 
shouldst not distress thyself thus. One who grieves is never 
successful, thou knowest it well. In this world, one should 
have faith and trust in God, pursue virtue and engage in action, 
O Raghava ! If thy mind is agitated, thou wilt never be able 
to overcome that titan, thine adversary, in combat, for he is 
a crafty fighter. 
" Banish thy grief and persist in thine endeavour ; it will 
be thine to triumph over this demon and his entire family. 
O Rama, thou canst overthrow the earth with its oceans, 
forests and mountains, how much more Ravana ! Wait but 
till the autumn, for it is now the rainy season, then thou shalt 
destroy him, his kingdom and his kinsfolk. Truly I desire to 
rekindle thy dormant valour, as at the hour of sacrifice the 
fire buried beneath the ashes is revived by glowing libations." 
This salutary and opportune counsel of Lakshmana's was 
received by Rama with respect and he answered in tender 
and friendly accents, saying : — 
" O Lakshmana, inspired by devotion, thou hast spoken to 
me with wisdom and courage. Henceforth I shall manifest 
that valour no danger is able to subdue. I shall wait 
for the autumn and in accord with thy counsel depend on 
Sugriva's willing co-operation and the state of the rivers. He 
who has rendered a service merits repayment ; the ungrateful 
who do not honour an obligation lose the respect of the good." 
With joined palms, Lakshmana listened with approval to this 
judicious speech and addressed Rama, who had regained his 
cheerful mien, saying : " Thou speakest truly, O Chief of 
Men; without fail, that monkey will bring about that which 
thou desirest. Meantime, while awaiting the autumn, endure 
236 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
the rains, resolving to slay thine adversary. Restraining thine 
anger, let us pass these four months of autumn together, 
dwelling on the mountain frequented by lions, and then 
hold thyself in readiness to destroy thine enemy.*' 
CHAPTER 28 
Rama describes the Rainy Season 
Having slain Bali and enthroned Sugriva, Rama, who was 
dwelling on the Malyavat plateau, said to Lakshmana : — 
" Now the rainy season is here, see how the heavens are 
laden with clouds as large as hills. After nine months, the 
sky, by the action of the sun's rays, has sucked up the waters 
of the ocean and is now giving birth to the showers. 
" Ascending to heaven by the stairway of the clouds, one 
might decorate the sun with garlands of Kutaja and Arjuna 
blossom. The sky appears like one wounded, bound with 
the rags of moisture-laden clouds, stained with the vivid tints 
of the setting sun, bordered with red. With the gentle breeze 
as its breath, the saffron colour lent by the twilight and its 
yellow clouds, the sky seems like one who is sick with love. 
Tormented by the sun's rays, the earth is shedding tears, 
like Sita racked by grief. Emerging from the heart of the 
clouds, cool as camphor, redolent with the fragrance of Ketaka 
flowers, the balmy winds can, as it were, be sipped from the 
palms of the hands. 
" This mountain of blossoming Arjuna trees, planted with 
Ketakas and anointed by showers of rain, resembles Sugriva 
freed from his foes. These mountains, that the dark clouds 
clothe as with antelope skins, catch the rain drops as the sacri ficial thread, their caverns filled with the wind lending them a 
voice; they resemble studious brahmin disciples reciting the 
holy Veda. 
" Whipped by lightning like unto golden thongs, the sky 
seems to be crying out in pain. The flash that convulses the 
breast of that sombre cloud is to me like Sita struggling in 
the arms of Ravana. When covered by dense cloud, the 
237 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
quarters of the sky, so dear to lovers, are blotted out, together 
with the moon and the stars. 
" On the ridges of the mountain, as if drowned in tears, 
these Kutaja trees in full flower, that sighed for the rain, rekindle 
love in me in the midst of the grief that overwhelms me. 
" The dust has settled and a cold wind blows ; the heat of 
the summer is allayed ; the martial undertaking of kings is 
suspended, and travellers have returned to their own country. 
" Now the waterfowl, in their haste to regain the Manasa 
lake, have left with their dear companions. Chariots and other 
conveyances no longer venture on the roads, deeply rutted 
by continuous rain. 
" Sometimes visible, sometimes invisible, the sky, sown 
with clouds, looks like a ocean encircled with hills. The 
streams carrying away the Sarja and Kadamba blossom assume 
a yellow hue from the metallic deposits of the rocks and pass 
swiftly on amidst the cry of peacocks. 
" The Jambu fruit, full of savour and gilded like a bee, is 
pleasant to the taste, and ripe mangoes of many tints fall to 
the ground shaken by the wind. Clouds like high mountains, 
having the lightning as their banner and cranes for their 
garlands, give forth a reverberating sound, like great elephants 
intoxicated with Mada juice who are about to fight. 
" The grassy slopes of those forest tracts, revived by the 
rain where delighted peacocks dance, gleam brightly under 
the moon at night. Charged with an immense weight of water, 
clouds surrounded by cranes emit a muttering sound and in 
constant movement journey on and on, sometimes resting on 
the mountain tops. In their joyous circling flight, cranes, 
in love with the clouds, resemble an enchanting garland of 
lotus flowers suspended in space at the mercy of the breeze. 
" The earth with its fresh grass strewn with tiny ladybirds, 
looks like a woman, whose limbs are swathed in a bright green 
cloth flecked with red. 
" Sleep falls gently on Keshava;1 the river runs swiftly to rejoin 
the sea ; the crane is happy to be united with the cloud ; 
fair ones approach their lovers with joy. 
1 Tradition holds that the Lord Narayana fell into the cosmic sleep in 
the rainy season, prior to the rebirth of Brahma, who issued from his navel. 
238 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
" See how the groves are rendered gay by the dance of 
peacocks and how the Kadamba trees are covered with flowers ; 
bulls, filled with desire, follow the cows and the earth is rendered 
charming by forests and fields of grain. 
" Rivers rush onwards, clouds discharge their rain, frenzied 
elephants are trumpeting, the woods grow more fair, lovers 
yearn for their loved ones, peacocks dance and the monkeys 
have regained their zest for life. Drunk with the aroma of 
the blossoming Ketaka trees, amongst the thundering water falls, the great elephants mix their amorous trumpeting with 
the peacocks' cries. 
" Flowers, bruised by the downpour, are expelling their 
nectar, that the bees gaily plundered from the branches of the 
Kadamba, trees and now it is falling drop by drop. With their 
abundant fruit resembling ashes, full of savour, the boughs of 
the Jambu tree are swarming with bees. 
" Following the woodland track amidst the hills, the chief 
of the elephants, hearing the roar of thunder behind him, 
halts in his tracks, thirsting to fight and, deeming it to be a 
challenge, turns back in fury. 
'* Filled now with the humming bees, now with blue-necked 
peacocks that dance or great elephants in rut, the woods 
take on a thousand varying aspects. 
" Abounding in Kadamba, Sarja, Arjuna and Kandala trees, 
the forest with the ground saturated with water, resembling 
wine and the intoxicated peacocks that cry and dance, takes on 
the appearance of a banqueting hall. The raindrops, like 
pearls, falling in the folds of the leaves, rest there happily, 
and the many coloured birds drink of them, delighted by this 
gift from the King of the Gods. 
" The soft humming of the bees, the joyous croaking of the 
frogs blended with the rumbling thunder of the clouds, resemb ling the roll of drums, create a veritable orchestra in the forest. 
" The peacocks with their richly decorated tails are the 
choir, some dancing, some calling, here and there clinging 
to the tops of the trees. 
" Roused by the sound of thunder, frogs of different shapes 
and colour waken from hibernation and whipped by the rain, 
croak loudly. 
»39 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
" The rivers, frequented by waterfowl, bear away their 
crumbling banks proud of their speed, and happy in their 
fullness, rush towards their lord, the ocean. 
" Sombre clouds charged with fresh rain melt into each other 
and resemble the rocks scorched by the forest fire whose bases 
cohere with those that are equally laid bare. 
" Elephants wander in the midst of the charming groves, 
that are filled with the cries of intoxicated peacocks in the 
grass sprinkled with ladybirds and planted with Nipa and 
Arjuna trees. Ardently embracing the lotuses, whose stamens 
are flattened by the recent showers, the bumble bees eagerly 
drink the nectar from these and from the Kadamba blossom 
that has been laid waste. Bull elephants in rut and leaders of 
kine disport themselves in the forest ; the king of beasts bounds 
through the thickets and the kings of men are enraptured and 
forget their cares and anxieties whilst the Chief of the Gods 
is disporting himself in the clouds. Torrents of rain loosed 
from the sky, causing the seas and rivers to overflow, flood 
the streams, lakes and ponds together with the entire earth. 
With sheets of rain falling and the wind blowing with extreme 
violence, the banks of the rivers are swept away and the waters 
surge onwards so that the familiar paths can no longer be trodden. 
" Like kings bathed by their servants, great mountains stand 
under the downpour from the clouds, which resemble ewers 
emptied by the King of the Celestials assisted by the Wind 
God, and seen thus, stand forth in all their native splendour. 
" The sky, overcast with cloud, renders the stars invisible ; 
the earth is saturated with the recent rains and the four quarters 
are shrouded in darkness. The summits of the mountains 
washed by the rain sparkle, their great cataracts twisting and 
falling like strings of pearls. Obstructed in their course by 
the jutting rocks, these mighty waterfalls precipitate themselves 
from the heights into the valleys like necklaces of pearls that 
break and scatter. Those rushing torrents, bathing the lower 
reaches of the rocky crests, fall into immense chasms, where 
they find themselves imprisoned and spray, resembling strings 
of pearls, which celestial nymphs have broken in the violence 
of their emotions, are scattered in unparalleled showers on 
every side. 
240 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
" Only when the birds withdraw to the trees and the lotus 
closes, whilst the evening jasmine opens, can one divine that 
the sun has set behind the Astachala Mountain. Kings postpone 
their warlike expeditions and even the army, already on the 
march, halts ; hostilities cease, for the roads are water-logged. 
It is the month of Prausthapada,1 when the brahmins who 
chant the Veda, the singers of the Sama Veda, begin their 
studies. 
" Assuredly Bharata, the King of Koshala, having collected 
the revenue and completed the storing of provisions, is now 
engaged in celebrating the festival of the month of Ashada.2 
" The Sarayu river must be overflowing its banks and the 
current increasing in velocity, like the shouts of acclamation 
with which Ayodhya will greet my return. 
" Sugriva will be listening with joy to the sheets of rain 
falling, since he has overcome his adversary, recovered his 
consort and regained his vast kingdom; but I, O Lakshmana, 
separated from Sita, exiled from my immense dominion, 
resemble the bank of a river that has been carried away by the 
current and precipitated into an abyss. 
" My grief is without bourne, the rains close every avenue 
and Ravana appears to me a formidable and invincible foe. 
Unable to travel on these impassable roads, I wish to make no 
demands on Sugriva despite his devotion, who after prolonged 
suffering is reunited with his spouse ; I do not desire to press 
for an interview on account of the urgency of his private concerns. 
" As for that, when he has rested and the time is ripe, 
Sugriva will of himself remember the help he has promised me, 
there is no doubt of it. Because of this, I wait hopefully, till 
the rivers and Sugriva are favourable to me, O Thou who 
bearest the auspicious marks of royalty ! 
" A favour obliges a man to show gratitude ; the ungrateful 
who fail to honour an obligation wound the heart of honest 
men." 
Lakshmana, standing with joined palms, fully concurred 
with these words to which he listened with extreme respect; 
1 Prausthapada — August-September. 
* Ashada — June-July. 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
then addressing the magnanimous Rama with a joyful air, 
he said : — 
" O Prince, the Ring of the Monkeys will not delay in 
carrying out the desire thou hast expressed ! Wait for the 
autumn and let the rainy season pass, re-affirming thy resolution 
to overcome thine adversary." 
chapter 29 
Hanuman urges Sugriva to honour his Promise 
Hanuman observed that the heavens had become serene, tree 
from lightning or cloud, filled with the cry of cranes and 
marvellously illumined by the light of the moon. 
Sugriva however, having attained his end, had become 
indifferent to his duty and proper responsibilities, allowing his 
mind to engage in lower pursuits. His ambitions fulfilled, he 
ceased to harbour any solicitude concerning his affairs and gave 
himself up to enjoyment with women, satisfying every capricious 
desire. 
Having realised his hopes and his fears being allayed, he 
passed the time by day and by night with his favourite consort 
Ruma and also Tara who was equally dear to him, as the Lord 
of the Gods disports himself among the troops of nymphs and 
musicians. Leaving the administration of the state to his 
ministers without supervision, his realm not being in peril, he 
became a slave to sense pleasures. 
Seeing this, the resourceful Hanuman, the eloquent son of 
Maruta, conversant with what ought to be done and knowing 
the appropriate time for the performance of duty, approaching 
the King of the Monkeys, who well understood what was 
placed before him, spoke to him with confidence, in well 
chosen words inspired by respect and affection, words that 
were pleasing, full of good sense, practical, true, salutary, in 
accord with the law and duty, expedient and diplomatic. Even 
such was the speech of Hanuman, which he addressed to the 
King of the Monkeys. 
242 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
He said : — 
" Thou hast recovered thy throne and thy glory and added 
to the prosperity of thine house ; it now remains for thee to 
concern thyself with thy friends ; this is thy duty ! He who, 
recognizing the fitting moment, conducts himself honourably 
towards his friends, sees the increase of his glory and his power. 
" He who treats with equal regard, wealth, sceptre, friends 
and life itself, O Prince, acquires a vast empire. Let this be 
thy conduct, establish thyself in the path of honour, this is 
what thou shouldst do for thy friends in accordance with thy vow. 
" He who does not abandon everything in order to occupy 
himself with the interests of his friends, whatever his aim, 
enthusiasm or undertakings, is courting failure. 
" In the same way, he who allows the occasion for coming 
to the assistance of his friends to pass is worthless, even if he 
achieve great things. We are losing this opportunity of serving 
the interests of our friend Raghava, O Vanquisher of Thy Foes. 
Let us occupy ourselves with finding Vaidehi. Rama has not 
reminded thee that the time appointed has gone by, though 
he is fully conversant with the hour ; albeit hard pressed, that 
sagacious prince has graciously resigned himself, O King ! 
" It is to Raghava that thou owest the prosperity of thine 
House, he wields immense influence, his power is immeasur able, his personal attributes incomparable. Render back the 
service he has done to thee, O Chief of the Monkeys, call 
together the leaders of thy people ! The delay is not yet serious, 
as long as Rama does not call upon thee to redeem thy promise, 
but if thou defer till he constrain thee by force, it will be too late. 
" Even had he done nought for thee, it would be thy duty 
to assist him in his quest, O Chief of Monkeys ! How much 
more so after the service he has rendered thee in re-establishing 
thee on thy throne and slaying Bali. 
" Thou art powerful and thy courage is extreme, O Thou 
who rulest the monkeys and the bears, therefore thou art under 
a greater obligation to assist Rama. 
" Without doubt the son of Dasaratha is able to overcome 
the Gods, the demons and the great serpents with his arrows, 
he is merely awaiting the fulfilment of thy vow. It was not 
without risking his life that he bestowed such happiness on 
243 R 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
thee. Let us scour the earth and, if need be, the sky, in search 
of Sita. Neither the Devas, Danavas, Gandharvas or Asuras 
accompanied by the hosts of Maruts, nor the Yakshas are able 
to make him tremble, much less the titans. 
" It is imperative, O Prince of the Tawny-coloured Ones, 
that thou shouldst try to please Rama with thine whole soul, 
who is endowed with that power that formerly succoured thee. 
"We will not hesitate to enter the subterranean regions 
beneath the waters nor ascend into the sky if thou commandest 
it, O King of the Monkeys ! Do thou decree who shall proceed 
and how and in what order. There are more than ten million 
monkeys of indomitable strength ready to serve thee, O 
Irreproachable Prince ! " 
Hearing these apposite and reasonable words, Sugriva, in 
his rectitude, made a supreme decision. 
Wisely commanding Nila of inexhaustible valour to gather 
the troops from every quarter, he said : — 
" Do thou muster mine entire army with its leaders and 
generals, whom none can resist, and bring them here immedi ately. The Plavagas who are stationed on the frontiers are 
skilled and brave, let them come here, see to it personally 
that I am instantly obeyed. He who does not present himself 
within fifteen days from now will be summarily executed, 
none shall escape. 
" With Angada, seek out the veterans, carry out my orders 
scrupulously." 
Having made all these arrangements, the Chief of the Monkeys, 
the valiant Sugriva, returned to his private apartments. 
chapter 30 
Description of Autumn 
Sugriva re-entered his palace, and the sky being free from 
cloud, Rama, who, during the rainy season, had been overcome 
by the intensity of his grief, gazing on the pure and tranquil 
moon and the marvellously clear autumnal nights, perceiving 
244 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
that Sugriva was leading a life of pleasure and reflecting on 
his own loss, also that time was passing, fell into a profound 
melancholy. 
Though he soon mastered his mood, yet the wise Raghava 
remained absorbed in the thought of Sita, and seeing the sky 
free from cloud taking on a serene aspect, re-echoing to the 
call of cranes, he began to lament in sorrowful accents. Seated 
on the jutting ridge of a mountain rich in gold, under the 
autumnal sky, his thoughts went out to his beloved spouse and 
he reflected : — 
" What joy can my youthful wife experience now, she, who 
loved the call of the cranes in the forest and imitated their note ? 
In mine absence, how can that tender maid take any delight in 
the tufts of flowers shining like pure gold, she, who formerly 
wakened to the cry of the swans ? What felicity can Sita of 
soft speech and tender form enjoy now ? 
" When she hears the cry of the wild geese, travelling in 
skeins, what will become of that princess, whose eyes are as 
large as lotuses ? I feel no happiness without Sita, whose eyes 
resembled the doe's, when wandering by river, lake and forest, 
and my beloved in her tenderness will suffer cruelly in mine 
absence, through the desire that the beauty of autumn inspires." 
Thus did that son of a King lament like unto the Saranga bird 
when it solicits water from Indra. 
At that moment, Lakshmana, who had gone out in careful 
search of fruits, returned from the enchanting mountain slopes 
and perceiving his elder brother absorbed in sorrowful thoughts, 
bis mind distraught, alone in that solitude, the sagacious 
Saumitri, who was deeply distressed by the grief of bis un fortunate brother, said to him : — 
" Why, O Noble Prince, hast thou become a slave to love ? 
Why this reversion of thy former resolution ? Thy distress 
precludes thee from reflecting calmly ; tranquiUity of mind is 
essential to carrying out any design ; after mature consideration, 
the time ordained together with the strength of thine ally 
should be utilised by thee for carrying out thy project without 
delay, O Friend! 
" Nay ! The daughter of Janaka supported by thee, will 
not be of easy access to the foe, O Protector of the Human 
245 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Race. None may approach a blazing fire without being burnt, 
O Valiant Warrior ! " 
On this, Rama answered the indomitable Lakshmana in 
characteristic accents that were worthy of him, saying : — 
" Thy words are practical and wise, full of good sense and 
in accord with duty and the law. We should reflect on how 
to act without delay ; this quest must be pursued ; when one 
is powerful, invincible, youthful and valiant, one should have 
no misgivings concerning one's success." 
Then recollecting Sita, whose eyes were as large as lotus 
petals, Rama with a downcast mien again addressed Lakshmana, 
saying : — 
" The Thousand-eyed God, having saturated the earth with 
water and caused the grain to germinate, his task accomplished, 
is now resting. The clouds, which amidst a deep and pro longed rumbling spread over the mountains, forests and 
cities, letting loose their showers, are stationary, O Prince. 
The fury of the thunderclouds, resembling intoxicated elephants, 
black as the leaves of the blue lotus, darkening the ten regions 
has abated. Swollen with water, the clouds have visited the 
fragrant groves of Kutaja and Arjuna trees with wind and rain 
and have now disappeared in their airy flight, O My Friend. The 
clamour of the herds of elephants, the cry of the peacocks and 
the sound of the rain have ceased, O Irreproachable Lakshmana. 
" Washed by dense clouds that have removed their impurities, 
the mountains with their magnificent escarpments shine forth 
illumined by the moon's rays. 
H Autumn now manifests her grace in the branches of the 
Saptacchada trees, in the light of sun, moon and stars and in 
the gait of the majestic elephants, and her influence appears 
everywhere. In the tufts of lotuses opening to the first rays 
of the sun, in the scent of the Saptacchada flowers, in the 
music of the humming bees, autumn shines in all her splendour. 
" The geese with their large and graceful wings, friends of 
the God of Love, have just arrived, covered with the pollen 
of the lotuses and are walking to and fro on the sandy banks of 
the rivers, disporting themselves with the swans. 
" In the intoxicated elephants, in the kine, in the tranquilly 
flowing rivers, autumn is reflected in her myriad aspects. 
246 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
Seeing the sky bereft of cloud, the peacocks in the woods, 
shorn of their caudal beauty, are no longer attracted to their 
chosen ones and having lost their brilliance, their delight has 
evaporated and they appear absorbed in their own thoughts. 
" The tall trees of sweet fragrance, the tips of whose branches 
are bent under the weight of their blossom, shining like gold, 
enchanting to look upon, seem to light up the depth of the 
forest. 
" Accompanied by their females, the great elephants, fre quenters of the pools covered with lotuses and the woods, 
who formerly stood amidst the flowers, intoxicated with ichor, 
now walk with a slow and languid pace, merged in amorous sport. 
" The sky has cleared and is as bright as a drawn sword ; 
the water in the river flows slowly j a breeze, refreshing the 
white water lilies, blows and those regions delivered from the 
darkness shine forth. 
" Freed from mud by the growing warmth of the sun, the 
soil is covered with a thick dust that the wind carries to a 
great distance. 
" It is the time when kings, at enmity with each other, start 
on their campaigns. 
" Shining with beauty with which the autumn has endowed 
them, exulting, their hmbs powdered with dust, mad with 
desire and thirsting to fight, the bulls bellow amidst the kine. 
" Sharing his love, the noble she elephant, eager and affec tionate, with a slow tread circles round the bull intoxicated 
with ichor and follows him in the woods. 
" Bereft of their tail feathers, their marvellous natural adorn ment, wandering on the banks of the rivers, the peacocks, as if 
scorned by the cranes, move about forlornly, in flocks. 
" With their formidable cries, the chief of the elephants 
strike terror in the ducks and geese standing in the pools 
covered with flowering lotuses and, having sprinkled them selves with water again and again, begin to drink. 
" On the rivers, free of mud, with their sandy banks and 
peaceful ripples frequented by herds of kine, re-echoing to the 
cry of cranes, herons frolic joyously. 
" The sound of the rivers, the clouds, the waterfalls, the 
winds, the cry of the peacocks and the croaking of frogs has 
247 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
ceased. Many coloured venomous serpents, greatly emaciated, 
deprived of food during the rains, tormented with hunger 
emerge from their holes where they have been confined so long. 
" The evening, caressed by the rays of the trembling moon, 
casts aside her veil, revealing her roseate countenance with its 
stars, in an ecstasy of joy. The night, whose gentle face is 
the full moon, resembles a youthful woman, the clusters of 
stars her smile and charming mien ; lit by the orb at its full 
it seems as if wrapped in a white mantle. 
" Gorged with ripe grain, an enchanting flock of cranes 
joyfully crosses the sky in rapid flight, blown by the breeze 
like a garland of flowers tastefully interwoven. 
" The waters of the great lake, with a solitary swan floating 
there asleep amidst countless waterlilies, resembles the heavens 
free from cloud, illumined by the full moon and a myriad stars. 
With their girdle of swans, their wreaths of blue and white 
lotus in flower, the great lakes are surpassingly beautiful and 
resemble lovely women decorated with jewels. 
" At break of dawn, blending with the sound of the breeze 
blowing through the reeds, resembling the notes of a flute, 
the deep roarings in the caverns, increased by the wind and the 
bellowing of bulls, seem to answer one another. 
" The river banks adorned with flowering grasses, stirred 
by a gentle breeze, resemble bright linen cloths from which the 
stains have been washed away. 
" Bumble bees, roaming at will in the forest, gorged with 
nectar, heavy with the pollen of lotuses, where they have 
rested, in an excess of joy accompanied by their loved ones, 
follow the God of the Wind, in the woods. 
" The calm waters, the flowering grasses, the cry of curlews, 
the ripened paddy fields, the gentle breeze, the immaculate 
moon, are all celebrating the departure of the rainy season. 
" To-day the rivers, wearing their silver fish as girdles, 
flow by slowly, like lovely women, moving languidly, having 
passed the night in love. 
" With the geese, aquatic plants1 and the reeds that cover 
them like woven shawls, the rivers, sparkling, resemble the 
faces of women. 
1 Aquatic plants, literally Shaivala — Vallisneria Octandra or Blyza. 
348 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
" In the forest, adorned with arches of blossom and full of 
the joyous humming of bees, the God of Love, to-day, im patiently wields his fiery bow. 
" Having saturated the earth with their profuse showers 
and filled the lakes and rivers, preparing the soil for the harvest, 
the clouds have disappeared from the sky. 
" Little by little, die rivers in autumn uncover their banks, 
like chaste brides disclosing their charms. 
" O My Friend, the waters having subsided, the rivers re echo to the cry of ospreys and flocks of geese abound in the ponds. 
" It is the time, O Beloved Prince, when kings declare war 
on each other and thirsty for conquest enter upon their cam paigns. The inception of hostilities for monarchs has begun, 
O Prince, and I do not see Sugriva making ready for an expedi tion of this kind. 
" Asana, Saptaparna, Kovidara trees are in full flower as also the 
Bandhujiva plant and the Tamala trees on the mountain slopes. 
" O Lakshmana ! Behold the sandy banks of the rivers abound 
in swans, cranes, geese and osprey that are seen on every side. 
The four months of rain that have passed seemei to me like a 
hundred years, so filled with grief was I on account of Sita's absence. 
" Like the Chakravaka bird with its mate, she followed me 
in the forest and the dreadful loneliness of the Dandaka 
solitudes seemed to that youthful woman a garden of delight. 
Though far from my beloved, overcome with sorrow, bereft of 
my kingdom and an exile, yet Sugriva shows no pity for me, 
0 Lakshmana! 
" ' He is without support, deprived of his kingdom, affronted 
by Ravana, unhappy, exiled, that amorous prince has taken 
refuge with me.' Thus will Sugriva speak, O My Friend, 
and in his perversity, he, the King of the Monkeys, holds me 
in contempt, I, the Scourge of My Foes. Having fixed a time 
to set out in search of Sita and entered into a formal contract 
to do so, this false one, having obtained his ends, has forgotten 
his pledge. 
" Do thou enter Kishkindha and in my name, address that 
Bull of the Monkeys, the wretched Sugriva, the slave of domestic 
bliss, saying : — * He who, having raised the hopes of those who 
have sought his help in adversity and who formerly rendered 
249 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
him a service) fails to fulfil his promise to them, is considered 
the least of men in this world but that valiant one, who for 
good or evil loyally honours his given word,he is the best of men. 
" ( Even the carnivorous beasts refuse to feed on the flesh 
of those ungrateful beings, who, having obtained their end, 
do not assist their friends to do so in their turn. 
" * Assuredly thou desirest to behold the gleam of my gold 
backed bow, resembling a series of lightning flashes, stretched 
ready for combat. Then shalt thou hear the dread twanging 
of my bowstring like unto the clash of thunder, when in wrath, 
I range the field of battle.' 
" Having brought my renowned valour to his remembrance, 
O Illustrious Prince, thou, who art my companion, it would be 
strange if he did not pause and reflect. O Thou Conqueror 
of Hostile Cities, since he, the King of the Plavagas, has gained 
his desire, he no longer recollects the time chosen, and the 
King of the Monkeys, wholly given over to pleasure, does not 
appear to be aware that four months have passed. Drinking 
and roystering with his ministers and his court, Sugriva does 
not trouble himself about us, who are filled with anxiety. 
" Go and address him, O Valiant Hero, inform him of our 
displeasure and speak to him in those terms, which are in spired by my wrath, saying : — * The Gate of Death, through 
which Bali passed, is not closed ! O Sugriva, honour thy 
pledge, for fear that thou mayest follow in the path taken 
by him ! ' Thy brother died alone, struck down by mine 
arrow but if thou failest in faith, I shall destroy thee together 
with thine whole House.' 
" O Greatest of Men, say all that will further our desire, 
we must not delay, O Prince. Say to him ' Honour the promise 
thou didst make to me, O King of the Monkeys, recollect that 
virtue is eternal or, losing thy life this day, thou shalt fall into 
the jaws of death, where my shafts shall despatch thee to 
seek out Bali ! ' " 
Seeing his elder brother, who was afflicted in his great 
misfortune, in the throes of violent anger, Lakshmana, burning 
with courage, the promoter of the glory of Manu's Race, pro foundly distressed, felt a deep resentment towards the King of 
the Monkeys. 
250 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
CHAPTER 3 I 
Lakshmana goes to Kiskkindha 
The offspring of that Indra among Men, the son of a king, 
then spoke to his elder brother, who, full of tenderness, cheer less, despite his natural gaiety and full of distress, had but 
now expressed his desire to him : — 
" Nay, that monkey is not a civilized being ; he does not 
consider the immediate consequences of his acts nor will he 
enjoy the glory of the monkey realm ; it is not fitting he should 
take advantage of circumstances in this wise. In his stupidity, 
he has become the slave of domestic bliss without calling to 
mind the debt he owes to thee ; let him therefore die and seek 
out Bali ; the throne should not be conferred on one devoid 
of virtue. I am unable to contain my violent rage ; I shall 
slay that disloyal Sugriva immediately. That son of Bali 
with the leaders of the monkeys shall this day assist us to 
recover the princess." 
Then Rama, the Destroyer of Warriors, in terms that were 
prudent and appropriate, addressed Lakshmana, who bow in 
hand desired to follow up his words with action and who 
full of ire was burning to fight : — 
" Nay, thine equals in this world do not commit such an 
outrage,1 the warrior who nobly masters his anger, is the 
greatest of heroes. Do not belie thy natural integrity, O 
Lakshmana ! Recollect the feelings of joy that the alliance 
with Sugriva formerly aroused in thee. Speak to him in 
moderate tones, omitting all harsh expressions, regarding bis 
delay and his tardiness." 
Thus counselled by his elder brother, that Lion among Men, 
the valiant Lakshmana, the Slayer of Hostile Warriors, entered 
the town of Kishkindha. The sage and virtuous Lakshmana, 
eager to carry out what was agreeable to his brother, filled with 
indignation, entered the abode of that monkey, bearing in his 
1 That is slay a Mend. 
251 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
hand his bow, resembling India's, high as the peak of a moun tain, like unto Mt. Mandara. 
Faithful to the behest of Rama, his younger brother, the 
equal of Brihaspati, reflected in himself how he should address 
and answer Sugriva and, filled with ire on account of his 
brother's anguish and displeasure, Lakshmana advanced like a 
loosened tempest, uprooting Sala, Tala, Ashwakarna and other 
trees in his impetuous strides, like a great elephant shattering 
the mountains and crushing the rocks under his feet, thus 
cutting short he distance to bis goal. 
That Tiger among the Ikshvakus then beheld the splendid 
city of the King of Monkeys, the inaccessible Kishkindha, 
hollowed out of the mountain and filled with warriors. His 
lips trembling in his fury against Sugriva, Lakshmana beheld 
those formidable looking monkeys ranging round the city and 
seeing that foremost of men, those monkeys resembling 
elephants, tore up parts of the mountain, rocks, boulders and 
great trees. Lakshmana, observing them seizing hold of these 
missiles, felt his anger redoubled, like a brazier lit with innumer able brands, and they, beholding that infuriated warrior, who 
resembled the God of Death himself at the dissolution of the 
worlds, fled in their hundreds on all sides. 
At that, those Foremost of Monkeys, returning to Sugriva's 
palace, informed him of Lakshmana's approach and of his 
anger, but that King of the Monkeys who was passing his time 
in dalliance with Tara paid no heed to what those Lions among 
Monkeys were saying. 
Thereupon, under the orders of the ministers, those monkeys, 
their hair standing on end, large as mountains or elephants or 
clouds, issued out of the city and terrible to behold with their 
nails and teeth, their jaws like tigers, stationed themselves in 
the open. Many had the strength of ten elephants, others 
were ten times as strong and some were endowed with the 
strength of a thousand elephants. 
Lakshmana, who was enraged, recognized that Kishkindha, 
filled with these monkeys, who were armed with trunks of trees 
and endowed with great valour, was difficult of access. And 
emerging from the walls and ditches, these monkeys stood 
courageously in the open field. 
252 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
In the face of Sugriva's debauched indifference and the 
provocative attitude of the monkeys, the valiant Lakshmana, 
guardian of the interests of his elder brother, was seized with 
fresh anger, and that lion among men, heaving deep and burning 
sighs, his glances flashing with fury, resembled a brazier belching 
forth smoke. 
With his pointed darts as the flickering tongue, his military 
ardour the poison, his bow the coils, he resembled a five headed snake or the blazing fire at the end of the world or the 
enraged serpent king. 
Then Angada, who had gone out to meet him, in his terror, 
suffered extreme discomfiture and that illustrious warrior 
Lakshmana, his eyes red with anger, commanded him saying : — 
" O Child, inform Sugriva of my advent and tell him that 
the younger brother of Rama has come. O Conqueror of thy 
Foes, tormented by his brother's grief, Lakshmana waits at thy 
gate. Do thou seek to prepare that monkey by addressing him 
in this wise and return with all speed to inform me of his answer, 
O Dear Child." 
Hearing these words spoken by Lakshmana, Angada, filled 
with distress, went to seek out his uncle, who now occupied his 
father's place and said to him : " Saumitri is come ! " 
Then Angada, overwhelmed by the harsh accents of that hero, 
his countenance bearing the traces of profound distress, went 
away, first offering obeisance to the feet of the king in 
great reverence and thereafter to those of Ruma. 
That valiant prince, having touched the feet of his father, 
then made obeisance to his mother also and finally pressed 
the feet of Ruma having informed Sugriva of what had taken place. 
Sugriva, heavy with sleep and fatigue, did not wake up but 
lay in a drunken stupor, sexual indulgence having dulled his 
reason. 
Meantime, seeing Lakshmana, fear troubling their hearts, 
the monkeys welcomed him with shouts to appease his wrath. 
Beholding him near at hand, they raised a great clamour, re sembling a huge wave or the growl of thunder or the roaring 
of lions; and this great tumult roused that red-eyed monkey 
adorned with garlands who was bemused with liquor, bis mind 
bewildered. 
253 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Recognizing his voice, two ministers of that king of the 
monkeys, accompanied by Angada, approached him. Both 
were of noble and venerable appearance and were named 
Yaksha and Prabhava. Ingratiating themselves by their speech 
that went straight to the point and sitting down near the king, 
who resembled Indra, the Lord of the Maruts, they said to 
him: — 
" There are two brothers, full of nobility and power, Rama 
and Lakshmana, who in human form are worthy of the kingdom 
they confer on others. One of them, bow in hand, stands 
at the door ; beholding him, the monkeys, terrified, are raising a 
great clamour. This brother of Raghava, Lakshmana, his 
spokesman, charged by him to communicate his wishes, has 
come at Rama's command and the son of Tara, the beloved 
Angada, has been sent to thee in all haste by Lakshmana, O 
King, as his deputy, O Irreproachable Prince. 
" That valiant warrior Lakshmana stands at the door, his 
eyes inflamed with anger and consumes the monkeys with his 
glances, O King. Go quickly and place thy head at his feet with 
all those who belong to thee, O Great Monarch, so that his 
anger may be instantly appeased. 
" That which the virtuous Rama desires, do thou carry out 
scrupulously so that his wrath be softened ; execute his wishes 
with care, O King, fulfil thy pledge and be true to thy word ! " 
CHAPTER 32 
Hanuman's Speech 
At these words of Angada and his ministers, Sugriva, learning 
of Lakshmana's anger, rose from his seat and came to himself. 
Having considered the different aspects of the matter, he 
addressed his counsellors, who were versed in the sacred 
formulas, with which he too was conversant and of which he 
was a strict observer, saying : — 
" I have neither spoken nor acted wrongfully; why is the 
brother of Raghava, Lakshmana, incensed against me, I ask 
254 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
myself? Evilly disposed persons, enemies ever looking for an 
occasion to charge me with imaginary crimes, have set the 
younger brother of Raghava against me. It behoves ye all to 
reflect on the matter wisely in order to discover the cause of his 
anger. Assuredly I do not fear Lakshmana any more than 
Raghava, but a friend who becomes angry without reason 
invariably creates anxiety. It is easy to contract a friendship, 
but extremely difficult to sustain it, for owing to the fickleness of 
the mind a friendship can be broken for the most trivial reason. 
Because of this, I am apprehensive in regards to the magnani mous Rama, for I have not been able to render back a 
proportionate service to him for that which he has done for 
me." 
Sugriva having spoken, Hanuman, that foremost of monkeys, 
answered according to his understanding, saying : — 
" It is in no way surprising, O Chief of the Monkey Tribes, 
that thou art unable to forget the significant and unexpected 
service rendered to thee by Rama. Assuredly that hero, for thy 
well-being, fearlessly slew Bali, equal to Indra in power. Un doubtedly Rama's feelings have been wounded, which is 
evidenced by his sending his brother Lakshmana, the increaser 
of his happiness, as his deputy, to thee. O Thou, the most 
skilled in discerning the seasons, autumn is here in all her glory, 
the Saptacchada and Shyama trees being in full flower, but 
thou, given up to pleasure, doth not perceive it. The sky, free 
from cloud, is filled with brilliant stars and planets, and on all 
the regions, lakes and rivers, calm prevails. 
"The time has come to inaugurate the search for Sita of which 
thou art conversant, O Bull among Monkeys. Finding thee 
forgetful, Lakshmana has come to inform thee that the hour is 
at hand. Grieving over the abduction of his spouse, the 
magnanimous Rama will speak harshly to thee through the 
lips of this hero ; is it a cause for wonder ? Having acted im properly towards him, I see no other means tending to thy 
welfare but to offer obeisance to Lakshmana and crave his 
pardon. 
" It is the duty of counsellors to utter what is true freely to a 
king and it is for this that after mature reflection I have spoken 
thus. 
*55 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
" Armed with his bow, Rama, in his wrath, is able to subdue 
the whole world as also the Gods, the Asuras and the Gand harvas. It is unwise to provoke one of whom subsequently 
forgiveness must be craved, the more so, when the recollection 
of a favour received places one under the obligation of gratitude. 
Therefore incline thine head before this man with thy son and 
thine entourage, O King, and remain faithful to thy promise, as 
a woman to her husband's will. It is ill-advised of thee to oppose 
Rama's behests, even in thought, for thou art well aware of this 
man's power, whose prowess is equal to Indra and the Gods." 
chapter 33 
Tara pacifies Lakshmana 
At Angada's request, and in accord with Rama's command, 
Lakshmana, the slayer of hostile warriors, entered the beautiful 
city of Kishkindha situated amidst caves. 
Seeing Lakshmana approaching, the highly powerful monkeys 
of immense size guarding the gate, stood with joined palms and 
beholding the son of Dasaratha filled with wrath, breathing 
heavily, dared not obstruct his entry. 
Then that mighty warrior, gazing about him, beheld that great 
city decorated with jewels and flowery gardens and rendered 
magnificent by heaps of precious stones with which it was filled ; 
abounding in spacious buildings and temples, with jewels of 
every kind in abundance offered as merchandise, it was em bellished by flowering trees covered with every desirable fruit. 
Born of the Gods and Gandharvas, monkeys, able to change 
their form at will, wearing celestial garlands and raiment, added 
to the beauty of the city by their charming appearance. 
Fragrant with the scent of sandalwood, aloes and lotus, the 
broad highways were also filled with the intoxicating odour of 
Maireya and Madhu1. 
1 Wines made from honey. 
256 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
Lakshmana beheld great mansions also, as high as the Vindhya 
and Meru mountains, and streams of pure water flowing through 
the city. He surveyed the enchanting abodes of Angada, 
Mainda, Dvivida, Gavaya, Gavaksha, Gaja, Sharabha, Vidhumati, 
Sampati, Suryaksha, Hanuman, Virabahu, Subahu and the 
great souled Nala, Kumuda, Sushena, Tara, Jambavan, Dadhi baktra, Nila, Sunetra and Supatala, dwellings like unto white 
clouds adorned with fragrant garlands and filled with jewels, 
grain and lovely women. 
The magnificent and inaccessible abode of the King of 
Monkeys, like the palace of Mahendra, stood on a white rock and 
was decorated with pinnacled domes resembling the peaks of 
Mt. Kailasha. Trees in full flower, bearing fruits of every kind 
of delicious flavour, had been planted there and resembled blue 
clouds, enchanting with their cool shade, celestial blooms and 
golden-hued fruit. 
Valiant monkeys, bearing weapons in their hands, guarded the 
resplendent gateway, the arches of which were of fine gold 
adorned with magnificent garlands. 
The mighty Lakshmana entered Sugriva's palace without 
hindrance as the sun enters a great cloud, and having traversed 
the seven courtyards, filled with conveyances and seats, he beheld 
the inner apartments of that Chief of the Monkeys abounding 
in gold and silver couches with rich coverlets and fine seats. 
On entering there, he heard sweet music blending with the 
rhythmic cadence of singing to the accompaniment of stringed 
instruments; and in the private apartments of Sugriva, many a 
high-born woman, distinguished for her youth and beauty, 
sumptuously attired, crowned with flowers and engaged in 
weaving garlands was observed by the high-souled Lakshmana. 
He noted too, that there were none of the king's attendants, 
who were not richly apparelled, happy, well fed and eager to 
offer their services. 
Hearing the sound of the women's anklets and girdles, the 
virtuous Lakshmana became confused and incensed by the 
tinkling of those ornaments ; and that hero stretched the cord 
of his bow so that the twanging resounded on all sides. There after the valiant Lakshmana, indignant on Rama's account, 
withdrew into a corner and stood silent, reflecting on his 
257 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
presumption in entering Sugriva's private apartments. Hearing 
the twanging of the bow, Sugriva, the King of the Monkeys, 
recognizing the presence of Lakshmana, began to tremble on his 
splendid throne. 
He reflected : ' As Angada previously informed me, Saumitri, 
through brotherly solicitude, has undoubtedly come hither.' 
Then that monkey, informed by Angada, his tidings now made 
doubly sure by the sound of the bow, understood that Lakshmana 
had come and he grew pale, his heart being filled with appre hension, and Sugriva, the King of the Monkeys, addressed 
Tara, of charming appearance, in well considered words 
saying : — 
" O Lady of Lovely Eyebrows, what cause for displeasure 
has the younger brother of Rama, who is gentle by nature ? 
Why has he come hither like a raving madman ? Dost thou 
know the reason of this prince's anger ? Assuredly that lion 
among men cannot be enraged without cause. If we have un wittingly displeased him, then considering the matter carefully, 
inform me without delay or go thyself to him. 
" O Lovely One, by thy sweet speech seek to conciliate him. 
Seeing thee, his mind will become tranquil and his anger be 
allayed, for great warriors do not permit themselves to treat 
women with harshness. When thy gentle words have soothed 
him and his mind and senses are under control, then I, in my turn, 
will approach that prince, whose eyes are as large as lotus petals 
and who is the conqueror of his foes." 
On this, Tara, swaying slightly, her eyes bright from the 
drinking of wine, her girdle loosened, hanging by a golden thread, 
wearing the insignia of royalty, with downcast looks approached 
Lakshmana. And when that great warrior beheld the consort 
of the King of the Monkeys, he, restraining his wrath in the 
presence of a woman, bowed his head, conducting himself like 
an ascetic. 
Under the influence of wine and observing the benign attitude 
of that Prince, Tara, discarding all diffidence, addressed him in a 
conciliatory manner, in words calculated to gain his confidence 
and said : — 
" From whence springs this anger, O Son of a King ? Who 
has failed to carry out thine orders ? What reckless person has 
258 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
approached the forest where the trees are dry with a flaming 
torch ? " 
Mollified by this sort speech, Lakshmana replied with studied 
courtesy : — 
" Why, given over to lust, does thy consort neglect his duty 
and his own true interests ? And thou, who art devoted to him, 
why dost thou not give the matter thy consideration ? He has 
become indifferent to the affairs of the kingdom and of ourselves 
and our displeasure. Surrounded by parasites, O Tara, he 
gives himself up to sensual enjoyments. 
" The four months appointed as the term of waiting have 
passed, but the King of the Monkeys in an orgy of drunken ness and pleasure, is unaware of it. Assuredly dissipation is 
not a proper means to the observance of one's duty and obliga tions. Intemperance brings in its train the loss of wealth, 
virtue and the capacity for enjoyment. 
" Not to requite a service received is to fail wholly in one's duty 
and to lose a good friend is immensely injurious to one's higher 
interests. From the point of view of prosperity, the greatest 
of virtues is friendship that is rooted in loyalty and justice ; he 
who rails in these is not fixed in his duty. This being so, 
what should therefore be done, O Thou, who art conversant with 
the path of duty ? " 
Hearing these just and reasonable words, expressed with 
gentleness, Tara assured the prince of the certain fulfilment 
of his enterprise and again addressed Lakshmana saying : — 
" O Son of a King, this is not the time for recrimination, thou 
shouldst restrain thine anger against my lord; he has thine 
interests at heart, forgive his folly, O Warrior. 
" O Prince, how can a man endowed with every good quality 
be indignant with one who is lacking in them ? Which of thine 
equals, despite his good character, would give way to wrath ? 
I know the reason for the displeasure of Sugriva's valiant ally, 
I am conversant with the service that you have both rendered us 
and which we must return. I know further, O Best of Men, that 
one must master one's passions. I am aware in what company 
Sugriva has yielded to lust, which is the cause of the present pro crastination that incites thy wrath. When man yields to desire 
he forgets time and place as also his duty and what should rightfully 
259 s 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
be done. Do thou pardon this Leader of the Monkey Race, 
who, at my side, without shame, gives himself up to sensual 
enjoyment to which he is the slave. Even the great Rishis, 
devoted to the practice of asceticism, when carried away by 
desire, lost control of their minds, how should this monkey, 
.therefore, volatile by nature, when overcome by passion, not 
become a slave to pleasure, king though he be ? " 
Having addressed these words of profound understanding to 
Lakshmana, whose courage was immeasurable, the gentle 
Vanari, with a troubled look, on account of her conjugal 
affection, then added for the good of her lord : — 
" O Most Excellent of Men, though overcome by desire, 
Sugriva has long since made preparation to thine advantage. 
Already hundreds, thousands and millions of valiant monkeys, 
able to change their form at will, inhabiting every kind of tree, 
have come here. 
" Be pleased to enter, therefore, O Long-armed Warrior; the 
chaste conduct of a sincere friend authorizes him to look on the 
wives of others." 
At Tara's invitation and urged by a desire to carry out the 
commands that had been laid upon him, that illustrious hero, 
the conqueror of his foes, entered the inner apartment. 
There, seated on a golden throne, covered with a rich cloth, 
he beheld Sugriva, resembling the sun itself, his person decked 
with celestial ornaments, of a godlike beauty and dignity. 
Wearing superb raiment and wreaths he looked like Mahendra 
himself, on every side he was surrounded by women adorned 
with crowns and jewels meet for goddesses, and his reddened 
eyes gave him the appearance of Antaka. 
Of the hue of fine gold, clasping Ruma firmly in his arms, 
seated on a magnificent throne, that large-eyed hero saw before 
him the mighty Saumitri of expansive eyes. 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
CHAPTER 34 
Lakshmana reproaches Sugriva 
Seeing that indomitable lion among men, Lakshmana, entering 
full of wrath, Sugriva was troubled and, observing that Son of 
Dasaratha breathing heavily and burning with indignation on 
account of the calamity that had overtaken his brother, the 
King of the Monkeys rose and, leaving his golden seat that re sembled the highly decorated standard of Indra, his eyes 
inflamed, approached Prince Lakshmana and stood before him 
like the mighty Kalpa tree.1 Thereupon the women, lead by 
Ruma, followed him, like a cluster of stars surrounding the 
moon. 
Then Lakshmana, filled with ire, said to Sugriva standing 
amidst the women with Ruma at his side, like the moon sur rounded by stars : — 
" That king who is endowed with great and noble qualities 
and is compassionate, who has subdued his senses and is grateful 
and loyal, obtains renown in the world, but the monarch 
who is rooted in unrighteousness and is unjust to his friends 
who have rendered him assistance, is the object of opprobrium, 
" To utter a falsehood with reference to a horse is to be 
guilty of the death of a hundred horses, in regard to a cow of a 
thousand cows, but to utter a falsehood in regard to a man is to 
destroy one's self as well as one's kindred. 
" That ungrateful wretch, who, having gained his end, does 
not render service for service, is guilty of the murder of all 
beings, O King of the Plavagas ; this is the text recited by 
Brahma on beholding one who was guilty of ingratitude ; it is 
known throughout the world, O Plavamgama. He who kills a 
cow or drinks intoxicating liquor or is a thief or violates his vow is 
still able to expiate his sin, but for him who is guilty of in gratitude, no expiation is possible. 
" Thou art an ignoble, false and ungrateful wretch, O Monkey, 
for having obtained what thou didst seek from Rama without 
requiting his services. Having achieved thy desire through 
1 Kalpa— The Wish-fulfilling tree. 
26l 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Rama, is it not thy duty to do everything in thy power to recover 
Sita ? Yielding thyself up to sensual delights, untrue to thy 
promise, Rama does not know thee for the serpent croaking 
like a frog, that thou art.1 
" In his compassion for thee, O Wicked Wretch, the magnani mous Rama enabled thee to regain the kingdom of the monkeys. 
Thou hast failed to acknowledge the benefits conferred on thee by 
the high-souled Raghava, therefore pierced by sharp arrows 
thou shalt follow Bali. The path thy brother took at death 
is not yet closed ! Honour thy promise, O Sugriva, do not 
follow in his wake. Since thou dost not behold the Prince of the 
Ikshwakus loosing his fiery shafts, thou art still able to remain 
serene and happy, without concerning thyself about his 
anxieties." 
CHAPTER 35 
Tara defends Sugriva 
Thus spoke Lakshmana, the son of Sumitra, inflamed with 
anger and Tara, whose face was as fair as the moon, answered 
him saying : — 
" O Lakshmana, the King of the Monkeys has not merited 
this harsh language, particularly from thy lips. Sugriva is not 
ungrateful nor false nor worthy of condemnation nor, O Hero, 
does he utter what is not true nor is he an impostor ! 
" The valiant monkey, Sugriva, has not forgotten the assist ance rendered to him by Rama on the field of battle, which no 
other was able to give. With the aid of the magnanimous 
Rama, Sugriva has regained his glory and the lasting dominion 
of the monkey realm and has been restored to Ruma and myself 
once again, O Scourge of thy Foes ! 
" Having been subject to cruel adversity and now enjoying 
the summit of good fortune, he has become insensible to the 
arrival of the time for the fulfilment of his promise, as was the 
Sage Vishwamitra of old. For ten years, that virtuous Sage was 
1 The meaning being "croaking like a frog to attracts frogs." 
262 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
attached to the nymph Ghritachi and failed to perceive that time 
was passing, he, who was skilled in discerning time.1 
" Sugriva had been deprived of physical pleasures over a long 
period, he was exhausted and had not experienced any relaxa tion, O Lakshmana, therefore Rama should pardon him. And 
thou, O Lakshmana, shouldst not give way to wrath like an 
inferior person without ascertaining what has taken place. 
Virtuous people like thee, O Lion among Men, do not give way to 
immediate and unreasoning anger. In all humility, I appeal 
to thee on behalf of Sugriva to control the grief that gives rise 
to this anger in thee. It is my firm conviction that Sugriva is 
ready to renounce Ruma, Angada, myself, kingdom, wealth, 
grain and herds to please Rama. Having slain that vile demon, 
Sugriva will restore Sita to Rama, as the moon is re-united with 
Rohini. 
" In Lanka there are hundreds, thousands and millions of 
irrepressible demons able to change their shape at will ; without 
destroying these formidable beings, it is impossible to overcome 
Ravana, by whom Maithili has been borne away. Sugriva is 
unable to defeat those demons of terrible exploits without the 
support of auxiliaries, O Lakshmana. This was Bali's con sidered opinion, that resourceful and experienced monarch of 
the monkeys. Knowing nought of the matter, I heard it from 
his lips. 
" In order to render thee assistance, the foremost of the 
monkeys have been summoned for this enterprise with in numerable carefully selected troops. Awaiting those valiant 
and powerful monkeys, chosen to assure the success of Rama's 
undertaking, the King of the Monkeys has not yet left the city. 
" O Lakshmana, some time ago Sugriva, wisely ordered that 
these monkeys should come together this very day. Thousands 
and millions of bears and hundreds of Golangulas4 as well as 
innumerable kotis3 of monkeys, burning with energy, will be at 
thy disposal to-day. 
" Therefore O Conqueror of Thy Foes, subdue thy wrath. 
Seeing thy face distorted with anger and thine eyes inflamed, 
1 This story is told in Balakanda. 
1 Golangula — a black monkey with the tail of a cow. 
* Koti — a crore or tea millions. 
263 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
the wives of these foremost of monkeys, far from being reassured, 
are suffering all the anguish of their former fear." 
chapter 36 
Lakshmana is reconciled to Sugriva 
By nature gentle, Lakshmana listened to those just and gracious 
words of Tara with deference. 
Perceiving the magnanimous acceptance of her speech, the 
King of the Monkeys threw off his fear as one discards wet 
clothing. Thereafter Sugriva tore off the gaudy and variegated 
garland from his neck and threw it away, his intoxication being 
dissipated and that Chief of the Monkeys addressed the re doubtable warrior Lakshmana with humility, thus gratifying 
him, and said : — 
" O Saumitri, I had lost my fortune, my fame and the kingdom 
of the monkeys which by Rama's favour have been wholly 
restored to me. Who is able to equal this or render it back even 
in part to that divine Rama, renowned for his exploits, O Prince? 
The virtuous Raghava will recover Sita and slay Ravana by his 
own valour alone ; as for me, I shall merely accompany him. 
What need of assistance has he who, with a single arrow pierced 
seven giant trees and a mountain, penetrating deep into the 
earth ? He by the sound of whose stretching bow the earth 
with its mountains quakes, what need has he for aid ? I shall 
follow that Indra among Men, O Lakshmana, when he goes 
forth to destroy his adversary, Ravana, together with his 
House. 
" If I have betrayed his friendship or confidence in some 
measure, may he pardon me; is there any without fault ? " 
These words of the magnanimous Sugriva pleased Laksh mana who addressed him affectionately, saying : — 
" Assuredly my brother will not lack support, O Prince of the 
Monkeys, above all, O Sugriva, with thy co-operation, who art 
full of humility. Such is thy valour and sincerity, that thou 
art worthy of enjoying the unequalled prosperity of the monkey 
realm. 
264 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
" With thine aid, undoubtedly, O Sugriva, the illustrious 
Rama will soon slay his enemies in battle. Virtuous, mindful 
of what should be done, intrepid in the field, thou utterest noble 
words that are worthy of thee, O Friend. Who else, recognizing 
his fault, at the height of his power, would speak thus, O Bull 
among the Monkeys, save mine elder brother and thee ? 
" Thou art equal to Rama in courage and strength ! Thou 
has been ordained his ally by the Gods, O Chief of the Monkeys. 
Why delay further, O Hero, let us go forth together and offer 
consolation to thy friend, who is afflicted on account of separa tion from his consort. 
" O Sugriva, forgive those reproaches that I addressed to thee 
on account of Rama's profound distress." 
chapter 37 
Sugriva assembles his Troops 
Hearing the words of the magnanimous Lakshmana, Sugriva 
said to Hanuman who stood near : — 
" Call together all those who inhabit the heights of the 
Mahendra, Himavat, Vindhya, Kailasha and Mandara mountains, 
as also those from the peaks of Mt. Pandu and the Five Hills ; 
those who dwell on the mountains that are bright as the dawn; 
those who inhabit the furthest shores of the sea in the western 
region and those on the mountains in the mansions of the sun ; 
those formidable monkeys who have taken refuge in the Pad machalu woods ; those monkeys resembling clouds of collyrium, 
who possess the strength of die lord of elephants, who dwell 
on the Anjana hill ; those possessing the splendour of gold, 
inhabiting the caves of the Mahashaila mountains and those who 
frequent the slopes of Mt. Mem, as well as those dwelling on 
Mt. Dhumra ; those who possess the brilliance of the rising sun, 
of immense bounds, who, on the Mt. Maharuna, drink the heady 
wine Maireya ; those who dwell in the vast, fair and fragrant 
forests with their charming glades, where the ascetics' hermitages 
are found. With the aid of the fleetest of monkeys summon 
265 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
them all from every quarter of the world by means of gifts 
and conciliation, Already I have sent out messengers who 
are famed for their agility, yet, in order to expedite matters 
further, let them be followed by other emissaries. 
" Bring those leaders of monkeys also, who are lazy or given 
over to pleasure. If they have not responded to my appeal in 
ten days, they will suffer the death penalty for infringing the 
royal command. Let those lions among monkeys under my 
dominion carry out my orders with all speed in their hundreds, 
thousands and millions. 
" Resembling mountains of mist shrouding the heavens, let 
those excellent monkeys of terrifying aspect come at my call. 
Let all the monkeys who are acquainted with the way, scour the 
earth ; call them together at my command with all speed." 
At the words of the Monkey King, the Son of the Wind dis patched groups of intelligent monkeys to every quarter. Setting 
out to that region traversed by Vishnu, by the paths fre quented by birds and stars, the monkeys, under the commands of 
their sovereign set forth immediately. 
Scouring the seas, mountains, forests and lakes, they called 
all the different monkeys together to help Rama. When these 
monkeys heard of Sugriva's order, a very death warrant, they, in 
fear, at once set out for Kishkindha. 
Those of the Flavagama Tribe, who were as black as coUyrium, 
filled with energy, came from the Mt. Anjana to the number of 
three kotis to join Rama. Those who frolicked on the high 
hills, where the sun sets, shining like gold, offered themselves in 
ten kotis. From the heights of Mt. Kailasha, monkeys whose 
colour resembled a lion's mane, came to the number of a 
thousand and those who lived on fruit and roots, who dwelt 
on Himavat came in tens of millions, whilst those terrible apes 
of fearful deeds, resembling burning coals, descended in haste 
from the Vindhya mountain in thousands of millions. Those 
who dwelt on the shores of the white sea, the dwellers of the 
Tamala forests and those who fed on coconuts could not be 
numbered. 
From woods, caves and rivers, a vast army of monkeys issued 
forth, who seemed able to drink up the sun's rays. Now those 
mighty monkeys, who had gone out in all haste to spur others on, 
266 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
found a great tree growing on the summit of Mt. Himavat. In 
ancient times on that divine and sacred peak, a great sacrifice 
had been performed which found favour with Mahadeva, who 
satisfies all the desires of the Gods. Thereafter many varieties 
of fruit and roots resembling ambrosia had sprung up in that 
quarter from the sacred offerings of grain and seed,1 and those 
who partook of them had no need of further sustenance for the 
period of a whole month. 
Then those foremost among the monkeys gathered those 
celestial fruits and roots with medicinal herbs from that place of 
sacrifice and they brought fragrant flowers also to please Sugriva. 
Having called all the monkeys of the world together, those 
chosen messengers returned with speed at the head of their 
troops and soon those fleet and spirited monkeys had returned to 
Kishkindha, where Sugriva was ; and they presented him 
with the fruit, herbs and roots that they had gathered, saying : — 
" We have scoured the mountains, rivers and forests ; all the 
monkeys of the earth have come at thy call." 
These words pleased Sugriva, the King of the Monkey Tribe, 
who freely accepted all the gifts they had brought. 
CHAPTER 38 
Sugriva goes to meet Rama 
Sugriva, having accepted the gifts presented to him, thanked the 
monkeys and dismissed them all. 
Having sent away those thousands of monkeys, who had per- 
formed their task, he deemed his mission, as that of the mighty 
Raghava, well nigh accomplished. 
Thereupon Lakshmana addressed the redoubtable Sugriva, 
the foremost of monkeys, with a deference which moved him, 
saying : — " O Friend, be pleased to set out from Kishkindha." 
1 That had been scattered there. 
267 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Hearing these words spoken by Shri Lakshmana, Sugriva 
filled with joy answered : — " Be it so, let us go forward, I am at 
thy command." 
Having thus spoken to the illustrious Lakshmana, Sugriva 
dismissed Tara with the other women and thereafter summoning 
the leaders of the monkeys in a loud voice addressed them, 
saying : — " Come hither ! " 
At the sound of his voice all those admitted to the presence of 
women came immediately and stood with joined palms before the 
king, whose brilliance equalled the sun's and who said to 
them : — 
" Go with all speed and bring a litter, O Monkeys ! " At 
this command they set out with rapid strides to seek that mar vellous litter and, when it was made ready, the supreme Sovereign 
of the Monkeys said to Saumitri : — " Be pleased to ascend the 
litter. O Lakshmana ! " 
Speaking thus, Sugriva with Lakshmana mounted the golden 
litter that shone like the sun and was supported by a large number 
of monkeys. A white canopy was spread over Sugriva's head 
and magnificent fans made of yaks tails were waved about him. 
Eulogized by bards, to the sound of conches and trumpets, he 
set out in regal state. Surrounded by hundreds of war-like 
monkeys bearing weapons in their hands he proceeded to the 
place whereRama dwelt and, having arrived at that excellent spot, 
that illustrious prince descended from the litter with Lakshmana 
and approached Rama with joined palms. Then the monkeys, 
grouped about him, did likewise and, seeing that great army of 
monkeys resembling a lake covered with lotus buds, Rama was 
well pleased with Sugriva. 
Raising the King of the Monkeys, who had prostrated him self before him and whose forehead touched his feet, the virtuous 
Rama embraced him to demonstrate his affection and esteem 
and requested him to be seated. Thereafter seeing him seated 
on the ground, Rama said : — 
'* He who divides his time judiciously between duty, pleasure 
and the legitimate acquisition of wealth and honours his responsi bilities in these things is truly a king, O Best of Monkeys ; 
but he who neglects his duty, his true interests and legitimate 
pleasures is like one who sleeps on the top of a tree and does not 
268* 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
wake up till he has fallen. The monarch who is ever ready to 
destroy his foes and delights in showing favour to his friends, 
who plucks the fruit of the threefold food,1 has fulfilled his duty. 
" The time has now come to act, O Scourge of Thy Foes, 
therefore take counsel with thy ministers, OKing of the Apes ! " 
Thus addressed, Sugriva answered Rama, saying : — " I had 
lost tame and fortune together with the entire monkey realm, 
O Long-armed Warrior but, through thy favour have received 
them again by thine and thy brother's grace, O Great One, 
O Greatest of the Conquerors. He who does not acknowledge 
a service done to him is an object of contempt. 
*' These energetic leaders have gone out in their hundreds to 
summon all the monkeys in the world, O Slayer of thy Foes. 
Monkeys, bears and apes full of valour, of ferocious aspect, 
familiar with the woods and inaccessible forests, monkeys that 
are born of the Gods and Gandharvas, able to change their shape 
at will, are on their way followed by their troops, O Rama. 
" These monkeys are proceeding here surrounded by hundreds 
and thousands,2 by millions and tens of millions ; these monkeys 
and their chiefs, who are as valiant as Mahendra and resemble 
mountains in stature, are coming together from the Meru and 
Vindhya ranges. They will unite with thee to fight the demon 
Ravana and, laying him low on the battlefield, will restore Sita 
to thee." 
Seeing the preparations made by that valiant monkey, in 
accord with his desire, the illustrious prince was delighted and 
his countenance resembled the blue lotus in flower. 
1 The three ends of life, duty, wealth and legitimate pleasures. 
■ Lit. Arvuda — a hundred millions. 
Sanku — is a thousand Arvudas. 
Madhya is an Arvuda ten times ; Antya is a Madhya ten times ; 
Samudra is a Madhya twenty times and a Paradha a Samudra 
thirty times. 
269 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 39 
The Arrival of Sugriva's Forces 
Thus spoke Sugriva, standing with joined palms before Rama, 
and that most virtuous of men, taking him in his arms, embraced 
him saying : — " It is no wonder that Indra sends the rain, nor 
that the sun with its thousand rays dispels the darkness from the 
sky, O My dear One, nor that the moon by its brilliance makes 
the night clear, nor that thine equals create the happiness of 
their friends, O Scourge of Thy Foes. To find nobility of 
character in thee is not strange ; I know thee by the affectionate 
tenor of thy speech. With thy support, O My Friend, I shall 
vanquish all my foes on the battlefield ; thou art mine ally and 
shouldst assist me. 
" To his own destruction, did that vile demon bear Maithili 
away, as Anuhlada1 carried away Sachi, having first deceived her 
sire.* Ere long, I shall pierce Ravana with my sharp arrows as 
Shatakratu, that slayer of his enemies, slew the haughty father 
of Paulomi." 
At that moment, darkness covered the firmament and veiled 
the fiery brilliance of that orb of a thousand rays ; a pall of dust 
hung over all regions, and the earth with its mountains, forests 
and woods trembled. The entire earth was covered with in numerable monkeys resembling kings of men and who, having 
sharp teeth, were gifted with great strength. In the twinkling of an 
eye, those foremost of monkeys surrounded by troops, number ing hundreds of kotis, endowed with extreme energy, roaring 
like thunder, gathered from the rivers, mountains and seas with 
others who inhabited the forests. 
Monkeys the colour of the rising sun or white like the moon or 
of the tint of lotus stamens or pale, having their home on the 
golden mountain, appeared in tens of thousands in attendance on 
that renowned and valiant monkey Shatavali. Then the puissant 
1 Anuhlada— A son of Hiranya-kasipu, a Daitya, father of Prahlada. His 
story is to be found in the Puranas. 
* Fuloman — a Danava who was slain by Indra when he attempted to 
curse him for ravishing his daughter Sachi. 
27O 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
sire of Tara, who resembled a golden hill, appeared at the head 
of many thousand kotis. Thereafter the father of Ruma, father in-law of Sugriva, who resembled the filaments of a lotus and 
was like a youthful sun, arrived accompanied by other thousands 
of kotis of monkeys ; and that foremost of monkeys, Kesharin, 
Hanuman's illustrious sire, appeared in company with many 
thousands of monkeys. And Gavaksha, King of the Golangulas, 
endowed with dreadful power came, surrounded by millions of 
monkeys ; Dhumra also, the destroyer of his foes, advanced with 
two thousand bears endowed with terrific speed. Thereafter 
the leader of herds, Panasha of exceeding prowess came, ac companied by three million mighty and dreadful warriors and 
he was followed by Nila of immense stature, who resembled a 
mass of collyrium, with ten kotis of monkeys. And bright as a 
golden mountain, the heroic Gavaya arrived with five kotis of 
monkeys, and in his devotion to Sugriva the brave chief Dari mukha brought a thousand kotis. Thereafter the two powerful 
Ashwiputras, Mainda and Dvivida presented themselves with a 
thousand million monkeys. The brave warrior Gaja conducted 
an army of three kotis of monkeys, and the illustrious king of 
the bears, called Jambavan, came at the head of ten kotis, placing 
himself under Sugriva's command. The renowned Rumana 
followed with a hundred kotis of intrepid monkeys in all haste. 
A hundred thousand million monkeys followed Gandhamadana, 
and an infinite number were under the command of Prince 
Angada, who, like his father, was full of courage. Thereafter, 
shining like a star, came Tara of supreme valour, accompanied 
by five kotis of monkeys from a great distance and there followed 
Indrajanu, a brave and skilful general, who in his turn presented 
himself at the head of eleven kotis, and also Rambha with an 
ayuta1 of soldiers; and there followed the monkey leader 
Durmukha, that valiant one full of phenomenal courage, with 
two kotis of monkeys, resembling the peaks of Mt. Kailasha. 
Hanuman himself was accompanied by thousands of monkeys 
and the supremely brave Nala was followed by the inhabitants 
of the woods to the number of an hundred, a thousand and an 
hundred monkeys. The fortunate Darimukha was escorted by 
ten kotis of monkeys and with loud shouts took his place beside 
1 Ayuta— » Ten thousand, a myriad or a. number not to be counted. 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Sugriva. And Sharabha, Kumuda, Vahni and Rambha came, 
those monkeys who were able to change their shape at will, with 
their forces of incalculable numbers covering the entire earth, 
its mountains and forests. All the monkeys inhabiting the 
earth gathered round Sugriva, leaping, gambolling and roaring, 
and those Plavagamas surrounded Sugriva like massed clouds 
round the sun. Full of courage and energy, they gave voice to 
repeated shouts of acclamation, bowing their heads in salutation 
to the King of Monkeys. Others, the leaders of armies, 
according to tradition, approached the king and stood by his side 
with joined palms ; and Sugriva standing in extreme devotion 
before Rama, informed him of the arrival of the monkeys and 
then addressed his generals, who were burning with zeal, 
saying: — "O Chiefs of Monkeys, station your forces duly on the 
mountain near rills in the woods and let each ascertain the 
exact number of his troops." 
CHAPTER 40 
Sugriva sends his Monkeys to the East in search of Sita 
Then the Lord of the Monkeys, his purpose accomplished, said 
to that lion among men, Rama, the destroyer of hostile hosts : — 
" Here, gathered together, are the foremost of monkeys in habiting my dominions, who are equal to Mahendra and are 
able to transport themselves anywhere at will. These ferocious 
monkeys, resembling giants and titans, of immeasurable prowess, 
renowned for their exploits, bellicose, valiant, indefatigable 
and supremely sagacious in all their deliberations, have come with 
their vast forces. 
" O Rama, these untold millions, who inhabit various 
mountain tracts, traversing land and sea, have come to place 
themselves at thy service. All are intent on their master's 
welfare and obedient to thy behests ; they are at thy command, 
it is for thee to dispose of them as thou wilt. Though I am 
fully conversant with thy design, yet do thou order all as thou 
judgest best." 
272 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
Thus spoke Sugriva and Rama, the son of Dasaratha, taking 
him in his arms, said to him : — 
" O Dear and Wise Friend, let us learn if Sita still lives or no 
and ascertain in what country Ravana dwells. Then, having 
come to where Videha's daughter is to be found, we will adopt 
those measures that circumstances dictate, the hour having been 
fixed. 
" O Lord of the Monkeys, it is not for me to command this 
expedition nor for Lakshmana; it is thou who must direct it; 
thou shalt be its leader. Do thou, O Lord, take the command 
thyself in this matter, thou art fully acquainted with my purpose, 
O Hero. Thou, the second of my friends, 1 art full of courage, 
wise, knowing how to choose the fitting moment, devoted to my 
true interests, supremely loyal and accomplished." 
Thus addressed, Sugriva, in the presence of Rama and the 
sagacious Lakshmana, said to his general, Vinata, who resembled 
a great hill and whose voice resounded like thunder : — 
" O Foremost of Leaders, who art accompanied by monkeys 
as bright as the sun and moon, thou art able to turn time and 
place to advantage and art skilled in conducting thine affairs ! 
Taking with thee hundreds and thousands of apes, explore the 
eastern region with its forests, woods and mountains, in search 
of Sita, the Princess of Videha and also Ravana's stronghold. 
Search among the mountain fastnesses, the forests and rivers 
for Rama's beloved consort, the daughter-in-law of King 
Dasaratha ; search by the beautiful Bhagirathi, the Sarayu, the 
Kaushiki and the Kalindi, the enchanting Yamuna and the great 
hills bordering the Saraswati, the Sindhu and the Shona of ruby 
waters, the Mahi and Kalamahi with their splendid wooded hills. 
" Look for them in the Brahmamalas, Videhas, Malavana, 
Kashikoshalas, and Magadhas, the Pundras and Angas, lands 
where the silkworm and silver mines abound and on the mountains 
and cities skirting the sea. Search through the houses in 
Mandara, amongst those people whose ears resemble cloths 
reaching to their nether lip, whose faces are black and dreadful, 
who are one-footed, though fleet withal, and whose bodies do 
not deteriorate ; those also who feed on human flesh, 
and the Kiratas, hunters who are golden-hued, of pleasing 
1 The first being Lakshmana. 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
looks, possessing thick hair worn in a knot, who subsist on raw 
fish and those creatures, tiger-men, terrible to behold. 
" O Dwellers in the woods, search carefully in all these 
places that are accessible by climbing and swimming and the 
Island of the Seven Kingdoms Yava, also and the islands 
Suvarna and Rupayaka, full of gold mines, called the gold and 
silver islands. Beyond these, is the mountain Shishira, whose 
peaks reach to the heavens, and which is inhabited by Gods and 
Giants. Seek here in the mountain fastnesses, cascades and 
forests for the glorious consort of Rama. 
" Thereafter you will reach the red and swiftly flowing river 
Shona ; from there descend to the seashore, where the Siddhas 
and Charanas dwell. In these enchanting sacred spots, seek 
everywhere for Ravana and Sita. Explore the forests, mountain 
sprung rivers, wild tracts and cavernous heights. It behoves 
you to examine the terrible islands in the ocean, where great 
waves arise and, whipped by the tempest, let forth a thunderous 
roar. There dwell Asuras of immense size, who by Brahma's 
permission, seize the shadows of birds flying over the sea. 
Arriving at that vast ocean, that resounds like clouds at the time 
of the dissolution of the universe, frequented by huge serpents, 
keep careful watch and crossing over that sea, called Lohita, 
whose red waters are terrible to behold, you will come upon the 
mighty knarled ShamaU tree. There, constructed by Vish wakarma, like unto Mt. Kailasha, decorated with every kind of 
gem, towereth the abode of Garuda. Terrible demons resembl ing hills of diverse forms, named Mandehas, hang suspended 
from the rocks there. Day after day, at the rising of the sun, 
those demons tormented by that planet, fall into the water, struck 
by Brahma's energy and then suspend themselves on the rocks 
once more. 
" Proceeding further, you will come to the sea, named 
Kshiroda, that resembles a white cloud with its waves shining 
like a necklace of pearls. In its centre rises the great 
white mountain Rishabha, planted with trees, bearing fragrant 
blossoms and a lake named Sudarshana covered with dazzling 
silver lotuses having golden stamens, where flamingoes abound. 
Vibudhas, Charanas, Yakshas and Kinneras in the company of 
troops of Apsaras, disport themselves on the shore of that lake. 
274 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
" Leaving the Kshiroda Sea behind, O Warriors, you will 
come to the Jalada sea which is a source of terror to all beings. 
There the Rishi Aurva1 created a shining object by the power of 
his anger, which was transformed into the head of a horse by 
Brahma. Its heat is unequalled and its food is the universe of 
movable and immovable beings. There the cries of the 
creatures of the sea, who are unable to bear the flames, can be 
heard wailing in its vicinity. 
" To the north of the Svadu Sea rises the high mountain 
Jatarupashila, covering thirteen yojanas, of the splendour of 
gold. There, O Monkeys, you will behold the supporters of 
the earth, the serpent resembling the moon, with eyes as large 
as lotus petals, worshipped by the Gods, and possessing a 
thousand heads, the divine Ananta of dark hue sleeping on the 
summit of the mountain. There stands a golden palm tree 
with three branches resembling a standard set upon an altar. This 
is the boundary of the Eastern region set up by the Gods. 
" Reaching up to the heavens, measuring a hundred yojanas, 
the mountain, Udaya, rises with its golden peak, beautiful with 
its Sala, Tamala and flowering Karnikara trees bright as the sun. 
" There also is the peak Saumanasa four miles in breadth and 
forty in height. From there in former days, Vishnu, the supreme 
Lord, measured the earth with three strides, the second being 
Mt. Meru. 
" The sun passing from Jambudwipa on the north and reach ing the summit of Saumanasa, again becomes visible to the 
dwellers in Jambudwipa. It is there that the great Rishis, 
Vaikhanasas, bright as the sun, perform their austerities. 
" This is the island Sudarshana, where the sun rises, giving 
light to all beings. Search for Janaki and Ravana on these 
mountain fastnesses and in the forests and woods. Here, 
when the sun shines on the Shaila mountain, the east appears 
roseate. Because the sun rises there, Brahma established it, 
in ancient times, as the gateway of the world, called the East. 
1 A miraculously born sage who castigated the warrior class, but on the 
persuasion of his ancestors, cast hiB anger into the sea, where it assumed 
the form of a being with a horse's head. 
In other versions it was said to be the subterranean fire that consumes 
the world at the end of the cycle and is represented as a flame with a horse's 
head. 
275 T 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Here you should look for Sita and Ravana on the mountain 
breast, in the caves and by the waterfalls. 
" Beyond is the impassable eastern quarter inhabited by the 
Gods, bereft of sun and moon, covered by darkness. Search 
for the princess in all those rocks, woods and streams that I 
have made known to you, but, O Foremost of Monkeys, you are 
only able to proceed thus far. Beyond is the region without sun 
or bourne of which I have no knowledge. Proceeding in search 
of Vaidehi and Havana's abode, having reached the mountain 
Udaya, return, when a full month shall have passed. Do not 
exceed the period ; he who does so, will be punished by death. 
" Having attained your end, and met with Maithili and with 
care explored the favourite region of Mahendra, which is 
covered with woods and thickets, return satisfied." 
CHAPTER 41 
Sugriva sends out other Monkeys to explore the Southern Region 
Then having sent away that mighty host of monkeys to the east, 
Sugriva dispatched another well tried army to the south. 
Appointing Angada leader of those heroic monkeys, that hero, 
the lord of the monkey bands, conversant with the countries 
that had to be explored, sent out those endowed with speed and 
valour : Nila, the Son of Agni, and the monkey Hanuman, the 
exceedingly energetic Jambavan, Suhotra and Sharari, 
Sharagulma, Gaja, Gavaksha, Gavaya, Sushena, Vrishabha, 
Mainda, Dvivida, Gandhamadana, Ulkamukha and Ananga, 
the two sons of Hutashana. 
And the King of the Monkeys began to describe those regions 
that were difficult of access to those simian chiefs, saying : — 
" You will first behold the Vindhya ranges, possessing a 
hundred peaks covered with trees and shrubs of every kind, and 
the enchanting river, Narmada, frequented by mighty serpents, 
and the wide and charming stream, Godavari, with its dark 
reeds, and the captivating Krishnaveni ; the regions of Mekhalas 
and Utkala and the city of Dasharna also ; Abravanti and Avanti, 
276 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
Vidarbhas and Nishtikas and the charming Mahishakas. You 
will sec too, the Matsyas, Kalingas and Kaushikas, where you 
should search for the princess and the Dandaka Forest with its 
mountains, rivers and caverns and the Godavari, also examine 
the districts of Andhras, Paundras, the Cholas, Pandyas and 
Keralas. Then repair to the Ayomukha Mountain, rich in ore, 
with its marvellous peaks and flowering woodlands ; that 
mountain, possessing lovely forests of sandalwood, should be 
carefully searched by you. 
" Thereafter you will behold that divine river of pure waters, 
the Kaveri, rendered gay by troups of Apsaras. On the summit 
of the mighty Mountain Malaya, bright as the sun, you will behold 
Agastya, the foremost of Rishis. By the permission of that high souled one, you will cross over the great river, Tamraparni, 
abounding in crocodiles. Ravishing forests of sandalwood cover 
the islands of these waters flowing to the sea, which resemble a 
youthful bride going to meet her lover. 
" Proceeding further, O Monkeys, you will see the golden 
gates set with pearls of the city of the Pandyas ; then in order 
to ensure the success of your enterprise, you will approach the 
sea and ascertain your ability for crossing it. In the centre of 
the ocean, Agastya has set that foremost of mountains, Mahendra, 
its slopes covered with trees. Entirely made of gold it extends 
deep down into the waters ; the abode of Gods, Rishis, Yakshas 
and Apsaras, thronged by innumerable Siddhas and Charanas 
and of surpassing loveliness, it is visited by the thousand-eyed 
God at each new moon. 
" On the other side of the sea is an island, four hundred miles 
in length, inaccessible to men and splendid to look upon ; 
search there with particular care, it is the abode of the wicked 
Ravana, who merits death, the Lord of the Titans, in splendour 
equal to Indra himself. 
" In the middle of the ocean dwells the female titan named 
Angaraka, who procures her prey by seizing the shadow of 
those who fly in the air. Your doubts at rest, search there 
for the consort of that king of men whose glory is limitless. 
" Beyond that island in the sea there rises a lovely hill on which 
Celestial Beings dwell, named Pushpitaka, bright as the rays of 
sun or moon, lapped by the waves of the ocean, whose peaks 
277 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
seem to pierce the heavens. Of these, one all golden, on which 
the day's orb lingers, the ungrateful and the unbeliever may not 
behold. Inclining your heads to that peak, offer salutations and 
search on. After this you will come to another mountain, 
difficult of access, named Suryavan extending over fourteen 
yojanas and, beyond this, the mountain Vaidyuta, ever green, 
with trees bearing every desirable fruit in all seasons. Par taking of these delectable fruit and roots and drinking the honey, 
pass on, O Monkeys. 
" Beyond there is the Mountain Kunjara which delights the 
eye and heart, where Vishwakarma constructed the abode of 
Agastya. Extending over four miles, this stately golden 
edifice adorned with many kinds of gems rises to the height of 
ten yojanas. There also is the city of Bhogavati, the abode of 
the Serpent Race, with spacious streets, incapable of being 
captured, guarded by formidable snakes and sharp-toothed 
highly-poisonous serpents, where the dread King of the Serpents, 
Vasuki, dwells. Search that city with care in every hidden 
place wheresoever it may be. 
" Going beyond, you will find the beautiful Rishabha Mountain 
in the form of a bull, filled with gems where excellent Goshiraka, 
Padmaka, and Harishyama trees and those possessing the 
brilliance of fire are seen. Approaching the sandalwood forest 
by no means should you enter there, for a certain Gandharva, 
named Rohita, protects it with five other Celestial Beings re splendent as the sun, named Shailusha, Gramani, Shiksha, 
Shuka and Rabhru. 
" Thereafter you will see the retreat of those ascetics, whose 
splendour resembles the sun, moon and fire ; this is the end of 
the earth where those who have won the heavenly regions, dwell. 
Beyond is the dread abode of the Pitris, which is inaccessible. 
There Death has his city, enveloped in abysmal gloom, O 
Bulls among Monkeys. Pursue your explorations thus far; but 
those who go beyond never return. 
" Having searched all those regions which are accessible to you, 
seeking for some trace of the princess, he who shall return 
within a month saying * I have seen Sita ' will pass his days in 
happiness, enjoying prosperity equal to mine, in the midst of 
every delight. None will be dearer to me ; I shall cherish him 
278 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
as a relative and, however great the number of his faults, he will 
become my friend. 
" Your strength and vigour are immeasurable and you are 
born in families endowed with great qualities ; strive manfully 
therefore to find the princess ; set forth on this mission of 
supreme importance and demonstrate your heroism." 
CHAPTER 42 
Other Monkeys are sent to explore the Western Region 
Having despatched those monkeys in a southerly direction, 
Sugriva, addressing the leader, Sushena, who resembled a cloud, 
with bent head and joined palms approached his father-in-law, 
Tara's sire, who was endowed with great prowess, and spoke 
to him also. Then he issued orders to Maricha, the son of 
Maharshi and the mighty ape, Archismat, surrounded by the 
foremost of monkeys, possessing the splendour of Mahendra 
and like unto Vainateya in brilliance, and also to Marietta's 
offspring, the Marichas, the mighty Archirmalayas, that all 
these sons of the ascetic1 should march towards the region 
of the West, saying : — 
" O Ye Monkey Chiefs, let two hundred thousand monkeys, 
led by Sushena, set out in search of Vaidehi ! Scour the 
countries of the Saurashtras, the Bahlikas and Chandrachitras 
abounding in antimony and other provinces and populous 
places and fair and pleasant cities and Kukshi, dense with Punnaga 
trees and filled with Bakula and Uddalaka trees, as well as the 
tracts covered with Ketakas and the auspicious streams whose 
cool waters flow towards the west. 
" Explore the forest of the ascetics and the mountain wood lands ; there, having searched the tracts resembling deserts, the 
towering cliffs and the mountain ranges, extremely difficult of 
access, proceed further, when you will behold the sea, which 
abounds in whales and crocodiles, O Monkeys. 
[ > Marichi. 
279 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
'* Then the apes shall disport themselves amidst the groves 
covered with Ketakas and dense with Tamala and coconut trees. 
Look for Sita and Ravana's stronghold there, in hills and woods, 
on the shores of the sea and explore Murachipattana and the 
delightful cities of Jafapura, Avanti and Angalapa as also the 
forest of Alakshita and all these spacious kingdoms. 
" There, where the river Sindhu joins the ocean, is a high 
mountain named Somagiri, possessing a hundred peaks and 
covered with tall trees. On its slopes dwell the Sinhas1 who 
carry whales and elephants to their nests. These are found on 
the mountain ridges and on the extensive plateaus, where wild 
elephants range, gratified with food, whose trumpeting re sembles the roar of thunder. The monkeys, able to change their 
shape at will, should scour that golden summit, towering to the 
sky and covered with graceful trees. 
" In the middle of the sea rises the golden summit of the 
Mountain Pariyatra, extending over a hundred yojanas. There 
dwell thousands of powerful Gandharvas, effulgent as fire, 
formidable and mischievous, resembling flames. O Valiant 
Monkeys, do not approach them nor seek to eat the fruits from 
that region. These fruit trees are guarded with ferocious 
vigilance by those mighty Gandharvas, nevertheless you should 
search for Janaki there, nor have you ought to fear if you pre serve your monkey form. 
" There is a mighty hill, the colour of emerald, shining like a 
diamond, named Vajra, covered with trees and creepers, an 
hundred yojanas in height and area ; carefully search all the 
caves of that mountain. 
" In the fourth quarter of the ocean is the Mt. Charavat ; 
there Vishwakarma forged the discus Sahasrara, which together 
with the conch was taken possession of by Shri Vishnu when he 
had slain Panchajana and the Danava Hayagriva. In those 
deep caverns and amidst those charming slopes, search for 
Ravana and Videha's daughter with care. 
" Beyond, rising from the depths of the sea, is the mighty 
mountain, Varaha with its peak of pure gold which measures 
four and sixty yojanas. On it is the golden city named 
Pragjyotisha where the giant, Naraka, dwells. There do you 
1 Lit. " Flying lions," possibly eagles or prehistoric birds. 
280 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
search for Ravana and Vaidehi among the beautiful plateaus 
and huge caves. 
*' Passing beyond that foremost of mountains, revealing 
glimpses of the gold in its depths, you will come to the Mountain 
Sarvasauvarna with its many fountains and waterfalls ; there 
elephants, wild boar, lions and tigers roar ceaselessly on every 
side, filling it with their clamour day and night. Then there is 
the mountain named Megha where the Gods crowned the 
fortunate Mahendra, he of the bay horses, the Vanquisher of 
Paka. Having passed that mountain protected by Mahendra, 
you should repair to a range of sixty thousand golden hills, bright 
as the rising sun, casting their light on every side and embellished 
with blossoming golden trees. In their midst rises the monarch 
of mountains, Meru, the foremost of hills, on whom Aditya, well 
pleased, conferred a boon saying : — 
" ' By my grace all the mountains under thy protection shall 
be golden by night and day and those Gods who inhabit thee, 
the Gandharvas and Danavas, shall both assume the radiance of 
gold.' 
" At dusk, the Vishwadevas, the Vasus, the Maruts and the 
Celestials gather to adore the Sun-god and worshipped by them 
the sun sinks below the horizon traversing forty thousand miles 
in the space of an hour, when it withdraws behind the mountain 
range. On the summit of that mountain rises a palace resembling 
the sun in splendour, consisting of countless towers, which was 
built by Vishwakarma and is graced by various trees filled with 
birds. It is the abode of the magnanimous Varuna, who bears 
the noose in his hand. 
" Between the Meru mountain and the Astachala Range there 
is a great Tala tree with ten crests, made of pure gold, which 
shines with extreme brilliance on a marvellous base. Search all 
the inaccessible places on this mountain, as well as the lakes and 
rivers for Ravana and Vaidehi. 
" It is there that the virtuous Merusavarni dwells, sanctified 
by his asceticism and equal to Brahma himself. Bowing down, 
you should make enquiries of the Maharishi Merusavarni,|who 
resembles the sun, concerning Mithila's daughter. 
" From the end of the night, all those regions, that the sun 
illumines till it sets behind the Astachala mountains, should be 
281 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
searched by you, O Bulls among the Monkeys, but of that which 
lies beyond which is covered in darkness and without bourne, 
we know nought ! 
" Search for Sita and Ravana in this region as far as the 
Astachala Mountain and at the end of a month, return ; those 
who tarry beyond this term will die. My father-in-law of long 
arms gifted with great prowess, I appoint as your leader ; you 
should abide by his commands and listen to all he says ; he is 
my spiritual preceptor. All of you are valorous and well able 
to ascertain the wisdom of a course, still you will be doing your 
duty in accepting him as your leader. In this wise, explore the 
western quarter. Having requited the good that has been done 
to us, we shall attain our end. Do you also determine what is 
pleasing to Rama and, in accord with time and place, execute it." 
Then those monkeys and their leaders with Sushena at their 
head, having given a due hearing to the wise counsel delivered 
by Sugriva, offered salutations to him and set out for the quarter 
protected by Varuna. 
chapter 43 
Searchers are sent to the Northern Region 
Having directed his father-in-law to the western region, the 
Lord of the Apes spoke to that heroic monkey Shatavali, in 
words fraught with his own and Rama's interests : — " With an 
escort of a hundred thousand rangers of the woods, the sons of 
Vaivasvat and thy counsellors, do thou explore the northern 
region, O Hero, which is crowned with the snowy peaks of 
Himalaya, and search everywhere for Rama's illustrious consort 
there. 
" O Most Grcumspect of Beings, having executed this task 
and done that which is pleasing to the son of Dasaratha, we shall 
have honoured our obligation and achieved success. The 
magnanimous Raghava has rendered us a great service and, if 
we can make some return, our life will not have been lived in 
vain. To render assistance to any in need is to make one's life 
282 
KISHKINDHA KAN",DA 
fruitful, even if one is under no obligation to do so ; how much 
more if one is able to repay one's benefactor. Reflecting on this, 
those who value our well-being and happiness should do all in 
their power to discover Janaki. 
" Rama, the foremost of men, revered by all beings, the 
conqueror of hostile citadels, is united with us in friendship. 
Endowed with courage and discrimination, do you explore these 
numerous and dangerous regions, rivers and mountains. 
" Search the lands of the Mlecchas, Pulindas, Shurasenas, 
Prasthalas, Bharatas, Kurus, Madrakas, Kambojas and Yavanas. 
The cities of Shakas should be visited by you as well as the 
Varadas, thereafter do you explore Himavat. In the tracts of 
Lodhras and Padmakas and in the Devadaru woods, search on 
every side for Ravana and Vaidehi. Reaching the Soma 
hermitage, frequented by Devas and Gandharvas, proceed to 
the mountain named Kala, possessing spacious plateaus. In 
the midst of these mountainous tracts, in the valleys and caverns 
search for that illustrious lady, Rama's irreproachable consort. 
Having traversed that golden breasted mountain, you should 
scale Mt. Sudarshana and further Mt. Devasakha, the refuge 
of birds, filled with every variety of winged creature and 
covered with trees of differing fragrance. Amidst its golden 
rocks, fountains and caves, search for Ravana and Videha's 
daughter. 
Going beyond this mountain, you will come upon an open 
space, measuring four hundred miles in extent, devoid of 
mountains, rivers and trees, nor are any living beings to be 
found there. Speedily traversing this desert you will reach 
the stainless Kailasha Mountain which will fill you with delight. 
There, resembling a pale cloud, you will see the charming 
domain of Kuvera, of burnished gold, constructed by Vish wakarma, where lies a great lake covered with flowering lotuses 
and lilies, frequented by swans and ducks, where troops of 
Apsaras disport themselves. There the King Vaishravana, 
adored by the whole world, the gracious dispenser of riches, 
sports with the Guhyakas1. Amidst these mountains, bright as 
the moon, as also in the caverns, search carefully for Ravana 
and Sita. 
* Hidden Beings attendants on Kuvera. 
283 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMI4CI 
Coming to Mt. Krauncha, with exceeding circumspection, 
enter its inaccessible caverns, which are well known to be ex tremely hard to penetrate. There dwell certain great and 
illustrious Rishis, effulgent as the sun, adored by the Gods, 
whose forms they assume. You should explore the other caves, 
plateaus and peaks of the Krauncha Mountain thoroughly. Then 
the tree-less Manasa peak will be seen, the abode of birds, and 
the scene of Kama's austerities, where no way for any creature, 
God or Titan exists ; this mountain should also be searched by 
you. Beyond this is the Mainaka Mountain where the great 
giant Maya has built his abode ; this place with its plateaus, 
plains and woods must also be searched by you. Women with 
the faces of horses dwell there. 
" Going beyond there, you will reach the abode of the Siddhas, 
where the ascetics — Valakhilyas and Vaikhanasas are. Fay 
obeisance to those great beings, whose austerities have cleansed 
them from all sin and, in humility, enquire of them concerning 
Sita. There is the Vaikhanasa lake covered with golden 
lotuses, the resort of beautiful swans, bright as the dawn. The 
elephant of Kuvera, Sarvabhauma by name, in the company of 
she-elephants, wanders about in that region. 
" Beyond that lake is a sky bereft of moon, sun, stars and 
clouds but it is illumined as if by so many solar rays, through the 
effulgence of god-like Sages crowned by asceticism, who rest 
there. Leaving that region behind, you come to the river 
Shailoda, on whose banks the Kichaka reeds grow, by the help 
of which the Siddhas cross to and fro. There are the Uttara 
Kurus, with whom those who have acquired spiritual merit take 
refuge. There are lakes there, whose waters are covered with 
golden lotuses and innumerable rivers abounding in dark green 
leaves and pools of the hue of the rising sun, embellished by 
clumps of crimson lotuses. Pearls and gems of great price and 
masses of blue flowers possessing golden stamens cover those 
tracts and rivers with floating islets, where gold abounds and 
high banks scattered with precious stones, are seen. The trees 
there, thronged with birds, bear fruit and flowers at all seasons, 
charged with delectable juices and distilling delicious perfumes, 
fulfilling every desire. Other excellent trees give rich attire of 
different kinds and ornaments of pearls, emeralds and other 
284 
KISHKINDHA RANDA 
gems desired by men and women ; some also bear fruit which 
can be partaken of in every season. Some trees bring forth 
precious couches bedecked with costly and variegated coverlets 
and others furnish enchanting garlands, costly drinks and various 
kinds of viands. Women possessed of every accomplishment 
distinguished for their youth and beauty, are there, sporting with 
Gandharvas, Kinneras, Siddhas, Nagas, and Vidyadharas of 
great splendour; and all those of righteous deeds engaged in 
pleasure and those who enjoy what is pleasant and useful, 
sojourn there with their wives. 
" There the continual sound of musical instruments, blended 
with sweet laughter, is heard, giving delight to all beings : there 
is none there who is not happy or wants for any desirable 
object and every day the enchantment of that place increases. 
" Beyond that region is the Northern Sea. There in 
the bosom of the deep rises the Somagiri Mountain of immense 
size. Though bereft of the sun, yet on account of the brilliance 
of the Soma mountain, that land is as bright as if Vivasvat 
himself had warmed it with his luminous rays. There dwells 
the Soul of the universe, Shambhuinin, in his cosmic form as the 
eleven Rudras surrounded by Brahmarishis. 
" O Foremost of Monkeys, you should not venture beyond 
the region of the Uttara Kurus, nor is there any way for creatures 
to do so. That mountain, named Soma, is incapable of being 
scaled, even by the Gods. Sighting this mountain, turn back 
speedily. You may proceed so far, O Foremost of Monkeys, 
but the region beyond, where unending night broods, is unknown 
to us. 
" You should search all those places, which I have described 
to you, and also those I have omitted to mention. O You who 
are equal to the wind and fire, by discovering the place of con cealment of Videha's daughter, you will be doing what is 
exceedingly pleasing to the son of Dasaratha as well as to me ! 
Having achieved your purpose, do you with your relatives, 
honoured by me and having acquired every distinction, your 
enemies slain, range the earth, the support of all beings, O 
Monkeys." 
285 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 44 
Rama gives his Ring to Hanuman 
Sugriva disclosed his plan to Hanuman in particular, being 
supremely confident that this leader, the foremost of monkeys, 
would accomplish his purpose. 
Then the monkey king, the lord of all the dwellers in the 
woods, well pleased, addressed the son of the Wind-God, the 
peerless Hanuman, saying : — " Nowhere on the earth, in the air 
or sky, in the celestial regions or in the depths of the sea, do I 
know of any obstacle that can impede thy course, O Best of 
Monkeys ! All the worlds with the Asuras, Gandharvas, 
Nagas, Men and Gods, as well as the mountains and the seas are 
well known to thee. In motion, speed, skill and energy thou art 
the equal of thy sire, O Valiant One, and there exists no creature 
on this earth that is like thee in vigour, O Hero of infinite 
resource ! Reflect therefore on how Sita may be found ! In 
thee, O Hanuman, repose strength, wit, courage and policy 
in conjunction with the knowledge of time and place." 
Realizing that success in the venture depended on Hanuman 
and that Hanuman himself was chosen on account of his ex ploits, Rama reflected : " This Lord of the Monkeys has 
supreme confidence in Hanuman and Hanuman too is sure of 
success ; he who has been tested by his deeds and who is con sidered worthiest by his master is certain to accomplish his 
purpose." 
Thereupon that mighty warrior, Rama, considering that his 
ends were already gained, felt a great felicity flooding his mind 
and heart and that scourge of his enemies, highly gratified, gave 
Hanuman a ring inscribed with his name that would be a sign 
to the princess and said to him : — 
" O Foremost of Monkeys, by this token, the daughter of 
Janaka will not fail to recognize thee as my messenger. O 
Warrior, thy resolution, thy courage and thine experience as also 
Sugriva's words seem to me to predict success." 
286 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
Thereupon, taking the ring and placing it to his forehead, that 
foremost of monkeys, offering obeisance to the feet of Rama, 
prepared to depart. Taking with him a mighty band of monkeys, 
that hero, the son of Pavana, resembling the moon in a cloudless 
sky encircled by stars, set forth. 
And Rama addressed that mighty warrior saying : — " O Thou 
endowed with the strength of a lion, I depend on thy valour ; 
by summoning up thy great resources, do all in thy power, 
O Son of the Wind, O Hanuman, to bring back the daughter of 
Janaka." 
chapter 45 
The Departure of the Monkeys 
Summoning all the monkeys, the Lord of the Apes, Sugriva, 
spoke to them touching the success of Rama's enterprise, and 
said: — 
" O Chiefs of the Monkeys, knowing my commands, go forth 
and search those regions indicated by me." Whereupon, 
covering the earth like locusts, the army started out. During 
the month fixed for the search for Sita, Rama and Lakshmana 
remained on the mountain Frasravana. 
The valiant Shatavali set out with all speed for the north, that 
marvellous region where the monarch of the mountain rises1 
whilst the leader of the monkey bands, Vinata, went towards the 
east. Tara,2 Angada and others, in company with that monkey 
born of Pavana, marched towards the southern region inhabited 
by Agastya ; and Sushena, that lion among monkeys, went to the 
west, that fearful region protected by Varuna. 
Having despatched the generals of his forces to each of the 
quarters, that king of the monkey hosts experienced supreme 
satisfaction. 
Under the orders of their sovereign, all the monkey leaders 
departed in great haste, each in the direction assigned to him 
and, full of valour, those monkeys shouted, cheered, howled and 
287 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
chattered, rushing on and on amidst a great uproar. Having 
listened to the instructions of their monarch, the leaders of these 
monkeys cried : " We shall bring Sita back and slay Havana ". 
Some said : " I alone shall defeat Ravana in open combat and 
having laid him low, shall deliver the daughter of Janaka, still 
trembling with fear, saying to her * Rest here, thou art weary '." 
Others said: " Singlehanded I shall recover Janaki even if it be 
from the depth of hell ; I shall uproot the trees, cleave the 
mountains, penetrate the earth and churn up the ocean." One 
said, " Without doubt I can clear four miles in one bound ! " 
and another, " I can clear a hundred," and yet another, "1 am 
able to leap more than a hundred. Neither on earth, in the 
sky nor on the sea nor mountains nor in forests, not even in the 
nether regions can anything bar my progress ". 
Thus in turn did the monkeys, proud of their strength, speak 
in the presence of their king. 
CHAPTER 46 
Sugriva narrates Ms Travels through the World 
The leaders of the monkeys having departed, Rama enquired of 
Sugriva saying : — " How is it that thou knowest all the quarters 
of the earth ? " 
Then Sugriva, bowing low, said to Rama : " Hear me and I 
will tell thee all. 
" When Bali pursued the giant Dundubhi, in the form of a 
buffalo, in the direction of the Malaya mountain, Mahisha1 
entered a cave in that mountain and Bali, desirous of slaying that 
Asura, followed him. 
" I remained obediently at the entrance of the cave, but a 
whole year passed and Bali did not re-emerge. Then the cavern 
was filled with foaming blood which gushed forth, and seeing 
this, 1 was terrified and consumed with a burning grief on 
account of my brother. Distracted, I reflected : * My elder 
1 Another name of Dundubhi, meaning " great or powerful animal," 
a buffalo. 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
brother is certainly dead ' and I placed a rock, as large as a hill, 
at the mouth of the cave, thinking ' The buffalo will not be able 
to come out and will die* ; after which I returned to Kishkindha 
giving up all hope of Bali being alive. 
" There obtaining the mighty kingdom with Tara and Ruma, 
surrounded by my friends, I began to pass my days in peace. 
" That bull among monkeys, however, having slain Dundubhi 
returned, and trembling with fear, in all humility, I made over 
the crown to him. 
" That wicked wretch, however, beside himself with rage, 
wishing to slay me, followed me whilst I sought to fly with my 
ministers. It was then that, hotly pursued by him, I passed 
by various streams, forests and cities. The earth appeared 
to me like the reflection of a whirling firebrand seen in a mirror 
or a puddle.1 
" Journeying towards the eastern region, I beheld many kinds 
of trees, beautiful mountains, charming caverns and lakes. I 
saw the Udaya Mountain rich in gold and the white sea, the 
abode of Apsaras. Pursued by Bali, flying on and on, O Lord, 
I turned and continued my course then, changing my direction 
once more, I made for the south, covered by the Vindhya 
Forest and embellished with sandal wood trees. Thereafter, 
seeing Bali among the woods, on the mountains, I went west wards still followed by him. 
"It is thus that I grew conversant with every kind of region 
and finally reached the Astachala Mountains. Beyond that 
most beautiful and elevated of ranges I turned to the north 
and passed Himavat, Meru and the Northern Sea. 
" Unable to find refuge from Bali, the sagacious Hanuman 
said to me :— * O King, I recollect now that the Lord of the 
Monkeys was formerly cursed by the Sage Matanga in this very 
hermitage. If he should enter this asylum, his head will be 
split into a hundred pieces ; we can, therefore, take up our abode 
here without anxiety.' 
" O Son of a King, I, thereupon, went to the Rishyamuka 
Mountain, nor did Bali dare to come there for fear of the Sage 
Matanga. This is how, O King, I visited every part of the world 
and took refuge in this cave." 
1 Lit. : Made by the imprint of a cow's hoof. 
289 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 47 
The Return of the Monkeys 
In order to find Vaidehi, those leaders of monkeys, in obedience 
to their sovereign's will, speedily went forth in all directions to 
their destinations, and they explored lakes, streams, plains, 
cities and tracts rendered impassible by torrents. Then those 
chiefs of the monkey bands searched the regions described by 
Sugriva with their mountains, woods and forests. Engaged 
during the day in seeking for Sita, when night fell, they stretched 
themselves on the ground, and coming to trees covered with 
fruits in all seasons, they slept there. 
Counting the day of their departure as the first, at the end of a 
month, giving up hope, they returned to their king on the 
Prasravana mountain. 
Having scoured the eastern region with his forces, the mighty 
Vinata returned without having seen Sita. Thereafter the great 
monkey Shatabali came back disappointed with his forces, 
having scoured the whole of the northern quarter. And 
Sushena, at the end of the month, ranging the western region 
without success, presented himself in company with his monkeys 
before Sugriva. 
Coming before Sugriva who was seated with Rama on a ridge 
of the Prasravana Mountain, and paying obeisance to them, 
Sushena said : " We have searched all the mountains, deep 
woods, valleys, ravines and the countries situated on the shores 
of the sea. All the places described by thee have been scoured 
by us, as also all the jungles intertwined by creepers abounding 
in thickets that are impassable and the hilly districts. Huge 
animals have been encountered by us, which we have slain, and 
we have searched these densely wooded regions again and again, 
O Lord of the Monkeys. It is Hanuman, who is mighty and 
nobly born, who will discover Maithili ; the son of the Wind has 
undoubtedly gone to where Sita has been taken." 
KISHRINDHA KANDA 
CHAPTER 48 
Angada slays an Asura 
The monkey Hanuman, accompanied by Tara1 and Angada, 
swiftly set out to the quarter assigned to him by Sugriva. With 
all those leaders of monkeys, he travelled a great distance and 
explored the woods and caves of the Vindhya Mountains. 
Rugged crags, impassable rivers, lakes, vast jungles, groves, 
innumerable hills covered with forests were searched by the 
monkeys on every side, without their being able to find Maithili, 
the daughter of Janaka, anywhere. 
Subsisting on various roots and fruits, they were overcome by 
fatigue in that uninhabited and waterless region amidst the 
fearful ravines and solitary places. Having searched that 
immense area extremely hard of access, with its mighty forests, 
containing caves, all those foremost of monkeys fearlessly 
penetrated into another equally inhospitable region, where the 
trees yielded neither fruit, flowers nor foliage and where the 
streams were dried up and even roots were rare. There, neither 
buffaloe nor deer, nor elephants, tigers, birds nor any other 
animals, that are found in the forest, could be seen. There were 
neither trees, grass, plants nor herbs, and in that place there were 
no pleasant pools with flowering or fragrant lotuses and no 
bees to be observed. 
There dwelt the fortunate Sage, Kandu, a treasury of ascetic ism, of truthful speech, whose austerities had rendered him in vincible and who was irascible, having lost his young son at the 
age of ten years in the forest. Filled with wrath on account of 
his death, that great-souled One had laid a curse on the entire 
vast forest, rendering it unfit to harbour any creature. This in accessible region, deserted by beasts and birds, the hidden 
recesses of the woods, the mountain caves and the bends of the 
rivers were carefully searched by the monkeys in order to carry 
out Sugriva's desire, but they were unable to find the daughter 
of Janaka or her abductor, Ravana, there. 
1 The General Tara. 
291 V 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Having entered a wood, overgrown with creepers and briars, 
they beheld a terrible titan, of dreadful deeds, cherishing no fear, 
even for the Gods. Seeing that formidable titan, who stood 
erect like a great hill, the monkeys pressed close to each other 
girding up their loins. 
Then that mighty Asura said to them " You are lost ! " and, 
clenching his fists, rushed upon them in fury, but Angada, the 
Son of Bali, thinking it was Ravana, struck him with the palm 
of his hand with such force, that he fell to the earth like a great 
hill, vomiting blood. When he had ceased to breathe, the 
triumphant monkeys searched that mountain cavern; and 
having satisfied themselves that it had been thoroughly explored, 
those dwellers of the woods entered into another fearful cave. 
After having searched that place also, they emerged exhausted 
and wholly dispirited sat down at the foot of a solitary tree. 
chapter 49 
The Monkeys search the Southern Region in vain 
Then the eminently wise Angada addressed all the monkeys and, 
though himself fatigued, exhorted them to take courage, saying : 
" We have searched the forests, mountains, rivers and im penetrable wilds, valleys and caverns with care, without finding 
the daughter of Janaka, Sita, or that wicked wretch, the titan, 
who bore her away. A great part of the time assigned to us 
by Sugriva, whose commands are inexorable, has elapsed ; 
therefore, banishing languor, despondency, torpor and 
fatigue, together let us examine every region once again. Search 
in such a way that Sita may be discovered by us. Perseverance, 
ability and ardour are said to conduce to success ; I therefore 
address you thus : — O Dwellers in the Woods, explore the whole 
inaccessible forest to-day without counting the cost, success will 
wholly depend on your exertions ; to permit yourselves to be 
overcome by fatigue or give way to sleep is not fitting. Sugriva 
is irascible and inflicts harsh punishments ; he is ever to be 
feared, as also the magnanimous Rama. I speak in your own 
292 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
interests ; therefore, if you concur, act accordingly or let someone 
point out what alternative will benefit us all, O Monkeys." 
Hearing Angada's words, Gandhamadana, though faint from 
thirst and fatigue, spoke in clear accents, saying : — " That which 
Angada has said is worthy of him and is appropriate and timely, 
let us act upon it ! Let us search the hills, caves, rocks, desert 
places and waterfalls, in accord with the instructions given by 
Sugriva; let us scour the forest and the mountain ridges 
together ! " 
Then the monkeys, rising, full of valour, began to range the 
south covered by the Vindhya forests, afresh. Scaling the 
mountain that resembled an autumnal cloud, rich in silver, with 
its innumerable peaks and valleys, those foremost of monkeys, 
eager to find Sita, ranged the enchanting Lodhra forests and die 
woods of Saptaparna trees. Ascending to the summit of the 
mountain, though endued with immense energy, they were 
overcome with fatigue, yet they did not see Vaidehi, the beloved 
consort of Rama, anywhere. Having surveyed that hill with its 
innumerable ravines, as far as eye could see, the monkeys looking 
on every side, descended and, reaching the base, harassed and 
beside themselves, halted for an instant under a tree; then 
finding themselves less fatigued, they prepared to explore 
the southern region again. 
Thereafter the chiefs of the monkeys, with Hanuman at their 
head, began to range the Vindhya hills once more. 
CHAPTER 50 
Hanuman and his Companions enter the Rikshabila Cavern 
The Monkey Hanuman, in company with the General Tara and 
Angada, once again explored the deep woods and ravines of the 
Vindhya range. Those monkeys searched the caverns which 
resounded with the roar of lions and tigers as well as the in accessible and mighty torrents. Finally they came to the south' 
western summit of the mountain and, while they rested there, 
time passed. 
*93 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
That region is hard to explore on account of the vast extent 
of the forests and the dangerous ravines and caverns ; neverthe less the Son of the Wind examined it all thoroughly. Separated 
from each other by a short distance, Gaja, Gavaksha, Gavaya, 
Sharabha, Gandhamadana, Mainda, Dvivida, Hanuman and 
Jambavan, the youthful Prince Angada and Tara, dwellers of 
the woods, began to search those regions in the south covered 
by the mountain range. 
While they were exploring this place on every side, they 
observed the opening to a cave named Rikshabila, difficult of 
entry, guarded by a giant. Tortured with hunger and thirst and 
overcome with exhaustion they espied this cavity overgrown by 
trees, bushes and creepers, from which herons, swans, geese 
and waterfowl were issuing, dripping with water and covered 
with the pollen of lotuses. 
Drawing near to that fragrant cave, difficult of access, those 
monkeys were struck with astonishment and desired to enter it. 
Then those foremost of monkeys, seeing signs of water, full of 
joy, approached that subterranean chamber abounding in every 
kind of creature, resembling the abode of Indra, which was im penetrable and fearful to behold. 
And Hanuman, the son of the Wind-god, who resembled 
the peak of a mountain, said to those redoubtable monkeys, 
who dwelt in the woods and forests : — " We have explored the 
southern region covered with a chain of mountains ; we are 
exhausted with fatigue and unable to find Maithili. From 
yonder cave, swans, cranes, herons and waterfowl are emerging 
on every side, drenched with water. Without doubt there is a 
well or pool to be found there for these trees at the mouth of the 
cave are green." 
Hanuman having spoken thus, all the monkeys entered into 
the dark cave, bereft of sun and moon, that caused their hair to 
stand on end. They heard the roar of lions and the sound of deer 
and birds and those invincible monkeys felt their courage and 
prowess fail ; moving with the speed of the wind and despite 
the darkness, their sight being unimpaired, they penetrated 
deep into the cave and beheld a luminous, enchanting and 
marvellous region filled with different kinds of trees of varying 
fragrance. Pressing close to one another, they advanced four 
394 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
miles into the interior and fainting with fatigue, bewildered, 
seeking for water, they continued to descend into the darkness. 
Emaciated, their faces woe-begone, spent, despairing of their 
lives, those monkeys then beheld a light. Happily they 
approached that spot and saw trees glistening like gold, posses sing the brilliance of fire, and they beheld Salas, Talas, Tamalas, 
Punnagas, Vanjulas, Dnavas, Champakas, Nagavrikshas and 
Karnikaras in full flower with clusters of golden blossom, 
crimson buds, twigs and creepers adorning them, dazzling as the 
dawn, their trunks being of emerald and their bark luminous. 
There were also lakes of blue lotus, abounding in waterfowl, 
there, and great golden trees encircled that place, that shone like 
the first light of dawn and fishes of gold and enormous lotuses 
were to be seen in pools of tranquil waters. Gold and silver 
palaces were to be found there with little windows of refined 
gold festooned with chains of pearls, the floors paved with 
silver and gold and encrusted with pearls and diamonds. 
And the monkeys beheld splendid mansions everywhere and 
trees laden with fruit and flowers that shone like coral and 
precious gems and golden bees and honey in abundance. 
Couches and marvellous seats of immense size, decorated with 
gold and diamonds, drew their gaze, as well as gold and silver 
vessels, heaps of aloes and sandal, pure foods, fruits and roots, 
cosdy vehicles, delicious syrups, priceless raiment and great 
piles of woollen cloths and wonderful skins. 
Whilst wandering here and there about that subterranean 
chamber, those courageous monkeys beheld a woman at a short 
distance from them. Attired in robes of bark and a black 
antelope skin, that ascetic, given to fasting, shone with a great 
effulgence. 
Astonished, those monkeys halted suddenly and Hanuman 
addressed her saying : — " Who art thou ? To whom does this 
cavern belong ? '* 
Bowing down to that aged woman, Hanuman, who resem bled a mountain, with joined palms, enquired of her: "Who 
art thou ? To whom does this retreat, this cave and its jewels 
belong?" 
295 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 5 I 
The Tale of the Ascetic 
Having spoken thus to that blessed ascetic given to the practice 
of austerity, who was clad in bark and a black antelope skin, 
Hanuman added : — 
" We entered this cave enveloped in darkness being wholly 
exhausted with hunger and thirst and overcome with fatigue ; 
having penetrated into the depths to seek for something to eat, 
we have become distracted on seeing all these marvels so that 
we have almost taken leave of our senses. 
" To whom do these golden trees belong, that shine like the sun 
about to rise and these pure foods, roots and fruits ; 
these mansions of gold and silver with their windows of gold 
refined in the crucible and their network of pearls ? Who has 
produced these golden trees covered with marvellous flowers 
and fruit emitting a delicious fragrance, the golden lotuses 
that float on the pure waters, the golden fish and the 
turtles ? Are they sprung from thy power or do they owe their 
existence to another? It behoves thee to tell us, who are 
ignorant in the matter." 
Hearing the words of Hanuman, the virtuous ascetic, engaged 
in the welfare of all beings, replied to Hanuman saying : — " O 
Foremost of Monkeys, Maya is the name of the magician of 
great powers, by whom this entire golden grove has been con structed. He who created this enchanting and celestial place 
was formerly the chief architect of the Giants.1 Having prac tised austerity for a thousand years in the vast forest, he obtained 
a boon from the Grandsire of the World, in virtue of which he 
attained complete mastery in his art, as well as an absolute con trol over the materials required therein. Having accomplished 
everything , that wonderful one, commanding every enjoyment, 
for a time lived happily in the mighty forest. Thereafter he 
conceived a great passion for the nymph Hema, whereupon 
Purandara hurled his thunderbolt at him and slew him. 
1 Danavas or Daityas. 
296 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
" Then Brahma bestowed this marvellous forest with his 
golden mansion on Hema with the perpetual enjoyment of her 
desires. I, Swayamprabha by name, the daughter of 
Merusavarni, guard this dwelling belonging to Hema, who, 
skilled in the arts of dancing and singing, is my dear friend, O 
Foremost of Monkeys ! By her favour, this vast forest has been 
given into my hands. Now tell me for what purpose and with 
what motive you have come hither ? Why are you roaming in 
these inaccessible woods ? Having partaken of these fruits and 
roots and drunk of the pure water, tell me all." 
CHAPTER 52 
Swayamprabha frees the Monkeys from the Cave 
That virtuous ascetic, greatly mystified, addressed all those 
leaders of monkeys who were now rested, saying : — 
" O Monkeys, if, satisfied by the fruits, your fatigue is alleviated, 
I would fain listen to your story if it is fit to be heard by me." 
Hearing these words, Hanuman, the Son of Maruta began to 
relate all with perfect candour, saying : " The Sovereign of the 
whole world, Rama, who is equal to Mahendra and Varuna, 
the illustrious son of Dasaratha, retired to the Dandaka Forest 
in company with his brother Lakshmana and his consort Vaidehi. 
The latter was forcibly carried away by Ravana. 
" His friend is that valiant monkey named Sugriva. By that 
monarch, the foremost of monkeys, we have been sent hither 
and with the assistance of those led by Angada, we have been dis patched to search the southern region inhabited by Agastya and 
protected by Yama. We have been commissioned to search for 
Sita, the daughter of Videha and the demon Ravana, who is 
able to change his form at will. Having scoured the forests and 
the seas of the south, overcome with hunger, we sat down at the 
foot of the trees. Our faces drained of colour, absorbed in 
thought, we were sunk in an ocean of anxiety which we were 
unable to cross. 
" Casting our eyes round, we observed a huge cave hidden by 
trees and creepers and enveloped in gloom. Now swans, geese 
297 
THE RAMAVANA OF VALMIKI 
and osprey flew out from that cave their wings dripping with 
water, and I said to those monkeys, ' Let us enter there ! ' 
which all agreed to do. Anxious to accomplish our purpose, we 
went in grasping each others hands, thus forcing an entry into 
that dark cave ; this is our purpose and the reason why we have 
come hither. Having come here, famished and exhausted, we, 
who were sorely tried by hunger, have been entertained on fruits 
and roots with the traditional hospitality. Thou hast saved us, 
who were weary and suffering from starvation ; now say what 
service the monkeys may render thee in return ? " 
Thus addressed by the apes, the all-knowing Swayamprabha 
replied to those monkey leaders, saying : " I am well pleased 
with all these excellent monkeys ; I am but fulfilling my duty and 
have no need of anything." 
Thus answered in words filled with nobility and virtue, 
Hanuman addressed that irreproachable lady saying: "We 
have all found refuge with thee, O Virtuous Ascetic, but the time 
fixed by the magnanimous Sugriva has run out since we entered 
the cave, it behoves thee, therefore, to assist us to leave this place. 
If the commands of Sugriva be disregarded, it will mean death 
for us. Please deliver us all ; the fear of Sugriva afflicts us. 
Great is the task that has been undertaken by us and if we remain 
here, that work of ours will not be accomplished." 
Thus addressed by Hanuman, the ascetic answered him say ing : — " For a living being to emerge from this cave alive, is 
hard, but by the power of my asceticism acquired through self 
control I shall deliver all the monkeys from this subterranean 
chamber. Do you all close your eyes, for none will succeed in 
issuing from this place if their eyes remain open." 
Then, desirous of going out, all those magnanimous monkeys 
instantly closed their eyes covering them with their hands, 
possessed of slender fingers, and in the twinkling of an eye, the 
ascetic transported them outside the cave and having saved them 
from danger, in order to encourage them, said : — 
" This is the auspicious Vindhya Mountain covered with 
trees and herbs, there the Prasravana Mountain and the great 
ocean. May good fortune attend you ! X go to my abode, O 
Foremost of Monkeys." 
With these words Swayamprabha re-entered the cave. 
398 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
CHAPTER 53 
Angada and his Companions consider what Course to take 
Then the monkeys beheld that awe-inspiring ocean, the abode 
of Varuna, shoreless, thunderous and abounding in huge 
billows. 
Now the month fixed by the king as the term set for the search 
had passed while they were exploring that mountain fastness, 
the miraculous creation of Maya. Sitting down at the foot of 
the Vindhya Mountain amidst the blossoming trees, those high souled monkeys anxiously began to reflect among themselves. 
Perceiving the spring trees bending beneath the weight of 
flowers interlaced by hundreds of creepers, they were filled with 
apprehension. Recognizing the advent of spring and knowing 
the time appointed for their task had run out, each in turn sank 
to the ground. 
Then that monkey having the shoulders of a lion, with plump 
and long arms, the youthful Prince Angada, endowed with 
wisdom, duly honouring the aged apes and other dwellers in the 
woods, spoke thus : — 
" At the command of the monarch of the monkeys, we set out 
and, while we sojourned in the cave, a full month has passed 
away, O Monkeys. The month Ashvayuj 1 was the time fixed, 
which was not to be exceeded. This is known to you ! What 
should now be done ? Receiving the mandate from your master, 
you who are his trusted men, politic, devoted to his welfare, 
skilled in every work, incomparable in its execution and re nowned in every quarter, have set out on this campaign with 
me as your appointed leader. Now, having failed to attain our 
objective, we shall certainly die, of this there is no shadow of 
doubt. Who, failing to execute the commands of the King of 
the Monkeys, can live at ease ? The time allotted by Sugriva 
has run out, all that remains is for us, the dwellers in the woods, 
to die fasting. Stern by nature, jealous of his authority, he will 
not forgive us if we return having transgressed his orders. He 
1 September-October. 
299 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
will regard it as a crime if we come before him without news of 
Sita ; it is therefore better to allow ourselves to die of hunger here 
than give up all hope of seeing our sons, wives, wealth and homes. 
It were preferable to die here than perish ignominously at the 
hands of Sugriva. Further, I was not installed as heir-apparent 
by Sugriva but by Rama, that king among men of immortal 
exploits. Entertaining enmity to me of old, the king, finding 
me at fault, will determine to take my life by cruel means. Of 
what use is it to meet death in the presence of my friends who 
will witness the last moments of my existence ? I shall remain 
here en the sacred shore of the sea for the last supreme fast." 
Hearing the words of the crown prince, all those monkeys, 
exclaimed in sympathy : — 
" Sugriva is harsh by nature and Raghava is devoted to his 
tender spouse. The king, perceiving that the time has past 
without our having been successful in our undertaking and that 
we have not found Vaidehi, will certainly put us to death in 
order to do what is agreeable to Rama. Those who fail (to 
execute his commands) may not enter the presence of a king. 
Having come hither as the principal servants of Sugriva, we must 
either find Sita or obtain information concerning her or else we 
must enter the region of Yama, O Hero." 
Hearing the monkeys speak thus in their terror, the General 
Tara said : — " Of what use is it to yield to despair ? Let us re enter the subterranean chamber and take up our abode there. 
That place abounding in flowers, food and water, which has 
been created by the power of illusion, is inaccessible. There 
we need not fear Purandara Himself or Raghava or the King of 
the Monkeys." 
At these words to which Angada himself assented, all the 
monkeys with renewed confidence, cried : — " Without delay, let 
us from now on employ those means that will save us from 
death." 
300 
KISHKINDHA KANPA 
CHAPTER 54 
Hanuman seeks to discourage Angada from his Design 
When the General Tara, who was as radiant as the moon, had 
spoken thus, Hanuman deemed that Angada had already usurped 
supreme authority. He knew the son of Bali to be endowed 
with the eightfold intelligence, the four powers and the fourteen 
qualities,1 to be possessed of valour, energy and martial ardour, 
waxing in glory like the moon in the bright fortnight, the equal of 
Brihaspati in wisdom, in bravery resembling his sire and obedient 
to Tara's counsel as Purandara regards the instruction of Shukra.2 
Thereupon, Hanuman, versed in all branches of learning, 
resolved to win over Angada, who had become lax in the service 
of his sovereign and bring him back to the right path. Reflecting 
on the four means for bringing about peace, he chose the second, 
that of sowing dissension amongst the monkeys by subtle 
suggestion ; when the disaffection was general, he sought to 
instil fear in Angada's heart, by harsh words uttered in severe 
tones : — 
He said : — " O Son of Bali, surely thou art a warrior more 
skilful even than thy sire and art able to govern the monkey 
kingdom as well as he, but, O Foremost of Monkeys, the apes 
were ever fickle by nature. Bereft of their wives and sons, they 
will never suffer thy rule. This I declare to thee in the presence 
1 Eightfold Intelligence — The quality of accepting the truth and what is 
right, cherishing it, remembering it. propagating 
it. Knowledge of the positive and negative 
side of a matter. Knowledge of the ultimate 
essence. 
Four Powers — Physical power, mental power, power of resource, power 
of making friends. 
Fourteen Qualities — Knowledge of Time and Place. Endurance. 
Empirical knowledge. Skill. Physical strength. 
Power to conceal one's counsel. The honouring 
of one's obligations and promises. Heroism. 
Appreciation of the enemy's strength and one's 
own in relation to it. Gratitude. Beneficence to 
one's dependents or suppliants. Non-acceptance 
of insult. Freedom from uncontrolled movements. 
Poise. 
1 Shukra— Indra's spiritual preceptor. 
301 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
of all ! Neither by conciliation, gifts nor penalties shalt thou 
succeed in drawing Jambavan, Nila, the mighty ape, Suhotra, or 
myself to thy side. One who is strong can overcome the weak 
and usurp his place, therefore, he who is weak should, for his 
own safety, never incur the enmity of the strong. This cave, 
that thou deemest to be a safe refuge and which is said to be 
impregnable, can easily be penetrated by Lakshmana with his 
arrows. Formerly this tiny rift was made by Indra hurling his 
thunderbolt against it, but Lakshmana will pierce it like a leaf 
by means of his keen arrows. He possesses innumerable 
arrows of this kind, whose impact resembles lightning, capable 
of shattering the mountains themselves. 
" O Scourge of Thy Foes, as soon as thou dost install thyself 
in that place, the monkeys, remembering their wives and sons, 
will decide to forsake thee. Pining for domestic happiness, ever 
restless, anxious and weary of their pitiable plight, they will 
abandon thee. Thereafter, bereft of friends, relatives and those 
who seek thy welfare, even the trembling of a blade of grass will 
fill thee with terror. 
" Lakshmana's arrows, irresistible in flight, keen, formidable 
and of exceeding velocity, will transfix thee where thou hast 
sought to conceal thyself. 
" If, however, assuming a humble guise, thou, with us, dost 
present thyself before Sugriva, he will establish thee in the 
kingdom and restore thee as rightful heir. A virtuous monarch, 
firm in his vows, honorable and loyal, he desires thy welfare and 
will assuredly not kill thee. Thy paternal uncle is devoted to 
thy mother and wishes to do what is agreeable to her, this is 
the purpose of his life and she has no other son, therefore, O 
Angada, return with us." 
30a 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
CHAPTER 55 
The Monkeys decide to die of Hunger 
Hearing Hanuman's speech uttered with humility, filled with 
wisdom and justice and reflecting honour on Sugriva, Angada 
answered him saying : — 
" Stability, purity of mind and disposition, compassion, 
rectitude, daring and perseverance are unknown to Sugriva. 
He who, while her son was living, united himself to the beloved 
queen of his elder brother, on whom he should rightfully have 
looked as a mother, is to be condemned. What does he know of 
morality who, while his brother was in the grip of an Asura, 
closed up the opening of the cave ? What gratitude will he 
manifest who, having clasped his hand in friendship, forgot the 
favours received from his great benefactor, Raghava, of im perishable deeds ? Where is righteousness in one who directed 
us to search for Sita here, not from fear of disloyalty but of 
Lakshmana ? Who would trust that fickle, impious and un grateful wretch, more especially those sprung from his own race ? 
Whether he be possessed of good qualities or no, having estab lished me in the kingdom, will he suffer the son of his enemy to 
live? How can I, whose counsels have been disclosed, who 
have been found guilty, who am powerless, poor and weak, 
expect to survive if I repair to Kishkindha ? In his desire to 
retain the throne, Sugriva, who is wily, cunning and cruel, will 
assuredly place me in chains. For me death through fasting is 
preferable to being tortured and confined. Let all the monkeys 
abandon me here and return home. I vow I shall never re enter the city but shall stay here and fast to the end ; death is 
better for me. 
" Bowing to the king and also to the mighty Raghava, enquire 
after their welfare for me and bring news of my health and state 
to my adopted mother Ruma. To Tara, my real mother, offer 
consolation, for she is compassionate and pious and naturally 
full of love for her son. When she learns of my death, she will 
certainly yield up her life." 
303 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Having said this, Angada, making obeisance to the elders, his 
countenance woe-begone, weeping, spreading out some kusha 
grass sat down on the ground ; as he sat there, those foremost 
of monkeys groaned, burning tears falling from their eyes. 
Thereupon surrounding Angada, condemning Sugriva and 
praising Bali, those monkeys resolved to starve themselves to 
death and, seating themselves on the seashore on heaps of darbha 
grass, pointing towards the south, those excellent monkeys 
sipping water, facing the east, resolved to die, saying : — " This is 
better for us ! " 
As they spoke of the exile of Rama, the death of Dasaratha, 
the carnage in Janasthana, the slaying of Jatayu, the abduction of 
Vaidehi, the killing of Bali and the wrath of Raghava, 
those monkeys were filled with fear ; and while those in numerable monkeys, resembling the peaks of mountains sat 
there, the whole region with its torrents and caverns resounded 
with their lamentations like the roll of thunder in the skies. 
CHAPTER 56 
The Intervention of Sampati 
While the monkeys remained seated on the mountain plateau 
resolved on their last great fast, the King of the Vultures by 
chance came to that place. That long-lived bird, the fortunate 
brother of Jatayu, was renowned for his strength and prowess. 
Issuing from a cave on the mighty Vindhya Mountain, he 
observed the monkeys seated there and, highly gratified, said: — 
" Every man reapeth the fruit of his former acts, on account of 
this, after a long time, this food comes to me. I shall eat up these 
monkeys one by one as they die." 
Eyeing those apes, the Vulture expressed himself thus, and 
hearing the utterance of that famished bird, Angada, full of 
apprehension, addressed Hanuman in faint accents, saying : — 
" Behold, on account of Sita, Death, the descendant of 
Vivasvat, has come to this place to destroy the monkeys. 
Rama's purpose not having been effected nor the mandate of the 
304 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
king obeyed, this calamity has overtaken the monkeys unaware. 
Thou art conversant in detail with all that Jatayu, that Prince of 
Vultures did for the sake of Sita. All beings, even those born 
of the mating of beasts, desire to please Rama at the cost of their 
lives as we have done. On account of Rama's love and com passion, people bear each other affection and pity. The blessed 
Jatayu voluntarily laid down his life for the good of Rama ; 
we too, exhausted and about to die, came to this forest to render a 
service to the Son of Raghu. We have searched the woods in 
vain for Maithili. Happy is that Prince of Vultures who was 
slain in combat by Ravana for he is freed from the fear of Sugriva 
and has attained the supreme abode. The death of Jatayu and 
King Dasaratha and the abduction of Sita has placed the monkeys 
in jeopardy. The sojourn of Rama and Lakshmana in the forest 
with Sita, Raghava's slaying of Bali with an arrow, the slaughter 
of innumerable demons by Rama in his wrath, all owe their 
origin to those boons granted to Kaikeyi." 
Hearing these piteous words and seeing the monkeys stretched 
on the ground the magnanimous King of the Vultures was 
deeply moved and that sharp beaked bird cried out : — 
" Who is it who, causing my heart to tremble, speaks thus of 
the death of my brother, dearer to me than life itself ? How did 
the demon and the vulture come to fight in Janasthana ? It is 
after a long time that I hear the name of my brother spoken. I 
wish to descend from this lofty mountain height. I am well 
pleased to hear of my youthful and valiant brother, renowned 
for his exploits. I wish to learn of the death of my brother, 
Jatayu, O Foremost of Monkeys, and how King Dasaratha, whose 
elder son is Rama, beloved of his elders, came to be his friend ? 
I am unable to fly in consequence of my wings having been 
scorched by the rays of the sun. Assist me to descend from this 
mountain, O Conquerers of your Foes ! " 
305 
THE RAMAYANA' OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 57 
Angada's 'Narrative 
Though the voice of Sampati faltered on account of grief, the 
Chiefs of the Monkeys did not trust him, doubting his in tentions. 
Seated for the purpose of fasting to death, the monkeys, 
seeing that vulture, framed the following resolution, saying : — 
" Let us help him to descend and he will then devour us all ; 
should he do so, while we are seated here fasting, we shall have 
achieved our purpose and shall speedily attain success." 
Having thus resolved, they assisted the vulture to descend 
from the summit of the mountain and Angada addressed him 
saying : — 
" There was a great King of the Monkeys named Riksharajas, 
the founder of our race ; he was my grandsire, O Bird. He had 
two virtuous sons, Bali and Sugriva, both were exceedingly 
powerful. My father Bali, was famed throughout the world for 
his exploits. 
" Now it happened that the Sovereign of the whole earth, 
the descendant of Ikshwaku, the great and illustrious car warrior, 
Rama, the son of King Dasaratha, obedient to the injunctions of 
his sire, fixed in the path of righteousness, entered the forest of 
Dandaka with his brother Lakshmana and his consort Vaidehi. 
His spouse was forcibly borne away from Janasthana by 
Ravana and the friend of Rama's father, the Prince of Vultures, 
Jatayu, observed Sita, Videha's daughter, being carried through 
the air. Having shattered Ravana's chariot and released 
Maithili, that vulture being old and exhausted finally fell under 
Ravana's blows. Slain by the powerful Ravana, he had his 
funeral rites performed by Rama himself and attained the 
celestial abode. Then Raghava allied himself with my paternal 
uncle, Sugriva, and slew my sire, who had banished him from 
the kingdom with his ministers. 
" Having killed Bali, Rama installed Sugriva as Lord and 
Monarch of all the Monkeys. We have been sent by him in all 
306 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
directions under Rama's orders to search for Sita but we have not 
found Vaidehi, as by night one is unable to perceive the splendour 
of the sun. Having explored the Dandaka Forest, we, through 
ignorance, penetrated into a cave through a rift in the earth. 
That cavern was constructed by the illusive power of Maya and 
there we passed the month fixed by the King of the Monkeys, as 
the term appointed ; while executing the commands of Sugriva, 
we exceeded the time fixed and from fear have seated ourselves 
here, resolved to die of hunger, for, if we return to face the 
wrath of Kakutstha, Sugriva and Lakshmana, we shall surely 
be put to death ! " 
CHAPTER 58 
Sampatt tells the monkeys of Stta's Place of Concealment 
Hearing the pitiful narrative of the monkeys, who had resolved 
to give up their lives, the vulture in mournful accents, with tears 
in his eyes, answered them saying : — 
" O Monkeys, you have told me, that Jatayu, my younger 
brother, was slain in combat by Ravana, who was his superior in 
strength. Old and bereft of my wings, I can only resign myself 
to these tidings for I no longer nave the power to avenge my 
brother's death. 
" Formerly, when Indra slew the demon Vritra, my brother 
and I, wishing to prove which of us was superior, soared into 
the sky, drawing nearer and nearer to the sun with its aureole of 
rays. Flinging ourselves into the currents of air, we rose rapidly 
higher and higher, but the sun having reached its zenith, Jatayu 
grew faint. Seeing my brother tormented by the sun's rays, I 
covered him affectionately with my wings, for he was suffering 
greatly, whereupon they were scorched and I fell on the Vindhya 
Mountain, O Foremost of Monkeys, where I remained, not 
knowing what had befallen him." 
Thus addressed by Sampati, Jatayu's brother, the eminently 
sagacious Prince Angada answered : — '* If thou art indeed the 
brother of Jatayu and hast heard what I have related, then tell 
307 x 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
us, dost thou know aught of that titan's abode ? Say, if thou 
knowest, whether the retreat of that short-sighted, vilest of 
demons, Ravana, is near or far away ? " 
Then the illustrious elder brother of Jatayu answered in 
words worthy of him, causing delight to the monkeys, and said : 
" O Monkeys, my pinions being burnt, I am a vulture bereft of 
strength, yet by my words alone, I shall render Rama a signal 
service. 
" I know the realm of Varuna and those covered by Vishnu's 
three strides. I am also conversant with the wars between the 
Gods and Asuras and the churning of the ocean, from whence 
the Amrita issued. Though age has deprived me of strength and 
my vitality is ebbing away, this mission of Rama's must be- my 
first concern. 
" I saw a young and lovely woman, beautifully attired, being 
carried off by the wicked Ravana and that beautiful creature was 
crying out * O Rama ', ' O Rama ', ' O Lakshmana '. Tearing 
off her ornaments she cast them on the earth ; her silken cloak, 
resembling the rays of the sun striking on a mountain summit, 
shone against the dark skin of the demon like a lightning flash 
irradiating a cloudy sky. Since she was calling ' Rama ', 
* Rama ' I believe her to have been Sita. Now hear me, and I 
will tell you where the abode of that demon is to be found. 
" The son of Vishravas and brother of Kuvera, that demon, 
named Ravana, resides in the city of Lanka, constructed by 
Vishwakarma, which lies a full hundred yojanas from here on 
an island in the sea, furnished with golden gateways and 
ramparts of Kancana gold, with lofty palaces gleaming with 
Hema gold adorning it. A great wall, bright as the sun, en- 
circles it, and it is there that the unfortunate Vaidehi, attired 
in a silken cloth, is confined in Ravana's inner apartments, 
carefully guarded by demon women. It is there you will 
find Sita. 
" Four hundred miles from here on the southern shore of the 
sea dwells Ravana. O Monkeys, hie thither speedily and 
demonstrate your valour ! By supernatural means, I know that 
having seen that place you will return. The first course is the 
path taken by the fork-tailed shrikes and others living on grain ; 
the second by those who live on insects and fruit ; the third by 
308 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
cocks ; the fourth by herons, hawks and birds of prey ; the 
fifth by vultures ; the sixth by swans endowed with strength, 
energy, youth and beauty and the last by eagles ; we have all 
derived our origin from Vainateya,1 O Foremost of Monkeys. 
I shall avenge that execrable deed of that eater of flesh (Ravana) as 
also his cruelty to my brother.1 
" Resting here, I am able to see Ravana and Janaki, for we all 
possess the supersensual sight of Suparna.3 It is by virtue of 
our nature and on account of the food we eat, that we can see 
clearly to a distance of four hundred miles. We are instinctively 
drawn to search for our food at a distance, whilst other birds 
scratch it up with their claws at the foot of the trees where they 
roost, their sight being limited. 
" Do ye look about for a means to cross over the salty waves ; 
having found Vaidehi, return, your purpose accomplished. 
Now I desire to be taken by you to the shore of the sea, the abode 
of Varuna ; I will there perform the water ritual for the spirit 
of my high-souled brother, who has gone to the celestial abode." 
At those words those mighty monkeys carried Sampati, whose 
wings had been burnt, to the shore of the ocean, after which they 
brought back that King of the Birds to the Vindhya Mountain ; 
and, having received the information concerning Sita, they 
experienced great joy. 
CHAPTER 59 
He encourages them to pursue their Quest 
Hearing these words, sweet as nectar, uttered by the Vulture 
King, the monkey chiefs were filled with relief. 
Then Jambavan, the foremost among the apes, with all the 
monkeys, rising from the ground, said to the Vulture King : — 
" Where is Sita ? Who has seen her? Who has carried away 
Mithila's daughter ? Do thou tell us all this, and thus be the 
1 Vainateya — The Eagle Garuda. said to be Vishnu's messenger and 
vehicle. 
* Implying by sending the monkeys he would be avenged on Ravana. 
* Suparna — another name for Vainateya or Garuda. 
309 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
means of saving the dwellers in the woods. Who is able to 
forget the power of the arrows of Dasaratha that fly with the 
speed of lightning and those that are loosed by Lakshmana ? M 
Then Sampati, once again consoling those monkeys who had 
risen from their fasting and who were all attention to what was 
being related concerning Sita, well pleased, said to them : — 
" Hear how I came to learn of Sita's abduction at this place 
and who it was that told me where that large-eyed lady could be 
found ! It is a long time since I fell on to this inaccessible 
mountain, many miles in extent. Now I am old and feeble in 
life and limb ; in this condition my son, named Suparshwa, the 
best of birds, brought me food regularly. If the Gandharvas 
are extremely pleasure loving and the serpent race prone to 
anger and the deer exceedingly timid, we, in our turn, are 
voracious. 
" One day, tormented with hunger, I demanded food and my 
son flew off at sunrise to procure it, but returned at night with out any flesh. He, the increaser of my delight, had grown tired 
of searching for nourishment and in order to propitiate me said 
in all sincerity : — 
" ' My dear father, wishing to bring thee thine accustomed 
portion, I flew into the air and stationed myself near the approach 
of the Mahendra Mountain in order to obstruct the passage of 
thousands of creatures who range the sea. There I was, look ing down, guarding the pass, when suddenly I observed some one resembling a mass of collyrium, carrying a woman as 
beautiful as the dawn. Seeing them, I resolved to seize them for 
my prey, but he humbly implored me in peaceful accents to let 
him pass. None on earth, not even the wicked, devour the 
peaceful willingly, how much less a creature like myself! He 
passed on quickly, pushing away the air, as it were, with his 
energy. Thereafter, those beings that inhabit space approached 
me and paid obeisance to me and the great Rishis said tome: — 
" ' " By good fortune Sita still lives ! It is well for thee that 
he has passed by thee with this woman." 
" * Then the glorious Siddhas addressed me and informed 
me that it was Ravana, the King of the Demons, whom I had seen 
with the consort of Rama, the son of Dasaratha, the daughter 
of Janaka, who, her silken attire torn, overcome with an excess 
310 
KISHKINDHA KAN DA 
of grief, her hair falling about her, was calling the names of 
" Rama " and " Lakshmana ". Thus, 0 My Father, is how the 
time has passed/ 
" All this did Suparshwa tell me, and even on hearing it I did 
not consider exerting my strength, for without wings, how can a 
bird undertake anything ? But hear how I can help you with 
my word and knowledge, so that you can manifest your prowess ! 
By my speech and my experience I will do what is agreeable to 
you. I shall make the concern of the son of Dasaratha my con cern, do not doubt it. Possessed as you are of intelligence, 
energy and wisdom, incapable of being overcome even by the 
Gods, you have been sent here by the King of the Monkeys. 
The arrows of Rama and Lakshmana furnished with heron 
plumes are able to destroy the Three Worlds. Although the 
ten-necked Ravana is endowed with strength and energy, yet 
assuredly none can resist your united efforts ! There is no need 
for further delay. Now accomplish your purpose. The wise, 
such as you, are not dilatory in their undertakings." 
CHAPTER 60 
The Story of the Ascetic Nishakara 
When the vulture had offered oblations of water for the spirit of 
his brother and performed his ablutions, the monkey chiefs sat 
down on that marvellous mountain, placing him in their midst. 
Then Sampati, in order to reassure them, said cheerfully to 
Angada, who was seated surrounded by all the monkeys who 
escorted him : — " Listen to me with attention and in silence, O 
Monkeys, and I will tell you truly how I came to know of 
Maithili. 
" A long time ago, I fell on the summit of the Vindhya 
Mountain, O Irreproachable Prince, my wings scorched by the 
heat of the sun, which consumed them with its rays. On re gaining consciousness at the end of six days, faint and bereft of 
strength, looking round, I was unable to distinguish anything. 
Nevertheless on scanning the lakes, rocks, rivers, ponds, woods 
and countries, my memory returned and I reflected, * This 
3" 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
mountain filled with cheerful birds, containing deep caves and 
innumerable ridges is certainly the Vindhya Peak on the shores 
of the southern sea.' 
" Here lay a sacred hermitage revered by the Gods them selves, where a Sage named Nishakara, of severe austerities, 
dwelt ; since that time, that saint conversant with virtue has 
ascended to heaven. 
" X passed eight thousand years on this mountain. Then 
not having seen that ascetic, crawling slowly and pain folly down from that high peak to the ground covered with sharp 
pointed grass, eager to see that sage, I rejoined him with great 
difficulty. Formerly Jatayu and I visited that sage many times. 
" In that neighbourhood, sort and fragrant breezes blew and 
there was no tree without flowers or fruit. Approaching that 
sacred hermitage, desirous of seeing the blessed Nishakara, I 
waited at the foot of a tree. Then, at a distance, I beheld that 
Rishi, blazing with effulgence, who, having performed his 
ablutions, was returning towards the north. 
" As all living beings surround a giver, so was he surrounded 
by bears, srimaras, tigers, lions and snakes of various kinds. 
And when they observed that the saint had entered his hermitage, 
they all went away, as when a king retires, the ministers who have 
escorted him withdraw. 
" The Sage, on seeing me, was pleased, and retiring into his 
hermitage for a while, came out again and enquired as to my 
welfare. He said : — ' O My Friend, on account of thy dis coloured plumes, I am unable to recognize thee ; thy two wings 
have been scorched by fire and thy trail frame is shaken by 
gasps. In former times, I knew two vultures resembling the 
wind in speed, who were brothers, able to change their shape at 
will. Thou art, I know, the elder, Sampati, and Jatayu is thy 
younger brother. Both assuming human shape were wont to 
massage my feet with their hands. 
" * By what disease hast thou been afflicted ? From whence 
comes the loss of thy wings ? Who has inflicted this punish ment on thee ? Do thou tell me all ! ' " 
3" 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
CHAPTER 6l 
Sampati tells his Story to the Sage Nishakara 
Thereupon Sampati related to the ascetic the whole of his 
fearful, arduous and rash act of flying towards the sun : — 
" O Blessed One, the wounds I have received, the shame I 
feel and the exhaustion I experience, all prevent me from enter ing into a lengthy narrative. 
" From pride in our power of flight, Jatayu and I, in order to 
test each other's powers, vowing in the presence of the sages on 
Mt. Kailasha that we would follow the sun till it set behind the 
Astachala Mountain, flew into the sky. Reaching a great height 
together, we looked down on the earth with its various cities 
that appeared like chariot wheels. Sometimes the sound of 
musical instruments reached us, at others the tinkling of 
ornaments. In certain places we saw many damsels clad in red 
who were singing. 
" Passing rapidly through the air, we followed the path of the 
sun and observed a forest intersected with green rides ; the 
mountains appeared like pebbles and the rivers like threads 
binding the earth ; Himavat, Vindhya and that mighty mountain, 
Meru resembled elephants standing in a pond. 
" Nevertheless we were perspiring freely and were filled with 
anxiety and extremely fatigued, no longer being able, in our 
bewilderment, to distinguish between the south, west or the 
quarter presided over by Fire ; the earth seemed to us to have 
been consumed by flames, as at the end of the world period. 
My mind and my eyes failing, with a violent effort I fixed them 
on the sun and with great difficulty succeeded in doing so. 
The blazing orb seemed to us much larger than the earth in 
extent, and at that instant, Jatayu, without speaking to me, began 
to fall. Seeing this, I flew down from the sky and covered him 
with my wings, in consequence of which my brother was not 
burnt, but I, in my arrogance was scorched and thrown out of 
the wind's course. I surmised that Jatayu had fallen in 
313 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Janasthana, but my wings scathed, deprived of strength, I fell 
on the Vindhya Mountain. 
" Bereft of my dominion, my brother, my wings and my power, 
I now long to hurl myself headlong from the summit of this 
mountain and put an end to my existence." 
CHAPTER 62 
Sampati learns where Sita is from the Sage Nishakara 
" Having spoken thus to that foremost of Sages, in my distress, 
I began to weep, and that blessed One, reflecting for a while, 
said to me :■■ — 
" ' Thy two wings with their feathers will grow again and thou 
wilt recover thy sight, thine energy and thy prowess. Having 
learnt it from the Puranas and foreseen it by mine ascetic power, 
I know that a great event is about to take place. 
" * It concerns a certain king, named Dasaratha of the race of 
Ikshwaku, to whom a son, full of valour, will be bornty the 
name of Rama. He will repair to the forest with his brother 
Lakshmana, having been constrained to do so by his sire. 
" * The son of Nairriti, Ravana, the King of the Titans, in capable of being slain by Gods or Danavas, will bear off his 
consort from the forest of Janasthana. And, albeit tempted by 
delicious viands and objects of enjoyment and desire, that noble 
and illustrious one, overcome by grief, will not partake of them. 
Then Vasava learning of this will offer her ' payasa * resembling 
ambrosia that the Gods themselves only obtain with difficulty. 
Receiving this food, Maithili, knowing it to come from Indra, 
will offer part of it to Rama, by pouring it on the ground, saying : 
— ' Whether my husband or bis younger brother still live or have 
attained the celestial state, may this food be acceptable to them.* 
" * Rama's envoys having been sent hither, it will be for thee 
to inform them of the facts relating to Sita, O Airy Traveller ! 
Do not go hence for any reason, but whither canst thou go in 
this condition? Wait for the time and place; thou shalt 
recover thy wings. I am able this very day to furnish thee with 
3M 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
wings but by waiting here thou canst render a service to the 
worlds. Even so, thou shalt be doing thy duty to the two 
princes, the brahmins, thy spiritual preceptors, the sages and 
Indra. I also am desirous of beholding the two brothers, Rama 
and Lakshmana, after which I shall yield up my life.* 
" Thus did that great Rishi, conversant with the nature of all 
things, speak to me." 
chapter 63 
The Wirtgs of Sampati grow once more 
" Having consoled me with these words and many others, the 
eloquent ascetic took leave of me and re-entered his hermitage. 
Thereafter I crawled slowly out of the cave and scaled the 
Vindhya Mountain to wait for you. Since that time, a whole 
century has passed, and, keeping the words of that hermit in my 
heart, I await the time and place. 
" Nishakara has ascended to heaven and I, distracted by many 
thoughts, have been consumed with grief. When the idea of 
death comes to me, I put it away, remembering the words of 
the Sage. The determination he inspired in me to preserve my 
life dissolves my distress, as a flame in a lit brazier dispels the 
darkness. 
" Though fully conversant with the power of the evil-hearted 
Ravana, yet I approached my son saying : — * Hearing her 
lamentations and knowing these two princes to be deprived 
of her, how is it that thou didst not free Sita ? ' In my affec tion for King Dasaratha I was displeased with my son." 
As Sampati was speaking thus to the monkeys, his wings 
suddenly began to grow again in the presence of those dwellers 
in the woods. Thereupon seeing his body covered with 
tawny feathers, he experienced an immense joy and 
said to those monkeys : — " By the grace of Nishakara, that 
Sage of immeasurable power, my wings, that had been scorched 
by the sun's rays, have grown again and the prowess I possessed 
in my youth has returned. To-day I have regained my strength 
315 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
and vigour. Do you spare no effort to find Sita ; the recovery 
of my wings is a pledge of your success." 
Having spoken thus to the monkeys, Sampati, the foremost of 
birds, anxious to ascertain his powers of flight, flew up to the 
mountain top. Hearing his words, those mighty monkeys were 
delighted and confident of their success, prepared to demonstrate 
their valour. 
With the speed of the wind those foremost of monkeys, intent 
upon finding Sita, the daughter of Janaka, set out towards the 
south to the quarter dominated by Abhijit.1 
CHAPTER 64 
The Monkeys are disconcerted at the sight of the Ocean 
Thus informed by the King of the Vultures, the monkeys, 
endowed with the strength of lions, began to leap about, emit ting cries of delight. 
Hearing from Sampati that Ravana would be slain, the happy 
monkeys reached the sea, anxious to discover Sita. And 
coming to that place, those redoubtable warriors beheld the 
ocean, the mirror of the whole world. 
Arriving at the northern side of the southern sea, those 
exceedingly powerful and heroic monkeys halted there. And 
seeing the ocean which at times appeared to be asleep, at others 
playful, sometimes covered with huge waves and thronged with 
aquatic animals, causing their hair to stand on end, those fore most of monkeys were amazed and became despondent. Be holding that ocean incapable of being traversed, even as the sky 
itself, the monkeys began to lament, crying : " What is now to 
be done ? " 
Then the foremost of the monkeys, the mighty Angada, 
seeing the despair of the army at the sight of the sea, began to 
reassure those warriors afflicted with terror, saying : — 
" One should never give way to agitation, of all things it is 
1 Abhijit — the name of a constellation. Some Commentators translate 
it as meaning " he who is to be conquered " implying the region in which 
Havana was to be found. 
316 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
the most fatal : agitation destroys a man even as a provoked 
serpent doth a child. He who, when the time is ripe for dis playing his valour, becomes agitated, will grow weak and fail to 
attain his object." 
The night having passed, Angada took counsel with 
the older monkeys, and that monkey host surrounding him 
resembled the hosts of the Maruts surrounding Vasava. Who, 
save Bali's son or Hanuman was capable of maintaining dis cipline amongst those troops ? 
Having called the elders together in company with the army, 
the fortunate Angada, the subduer of his foes, saluting them, 
spoke words fraught with good sense, saying : — 
" Who amongst you is of sufficient stature to cross the ocean ? 
Who is able to carry out the commands of Sugriva, the conqueror 
of his foes ? Which valiant monkey can leap the four hundred 
miles and deliver the leaders of the monkeys from their great 
anxiety ? By whose favour shall we, crowned with success 
and content, return and behold our wives, our sons and our 
homes ? Who will enable us to meet Rama, the mighty Laksh matia and that dweller in the woods, Sugriva, with a light heart ? 
If there be any monkey capable of leaping over the ocean, then 
may he show his blessed form to us and deliver us from fear ! ' 
Hearing Angada's speech, no one uttered a word and the entire 
monkey host appeared stunned. Then that foremost of 
monkeys once more addressed them saying : — 
" O Ye Excellent Warriors, of tried valour, unimpeachable 
family and worthy of honour, say how far each of you is able to 
leap over the sea without any being able to hinder you ! " 
chapter 65 
The Leaders of the Monkeys each state what they are able to 
accomplish 
Having listened to Angada's words, those Chiefs of Monkeys, 
each in turn, began to dilate on what he was able to accomplish — 
Gaya, Gavaksha, Gavaya, Sharabha, Gandhamadana, Mainda, 
317 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Dvivida and Angada as also Jambavan. Gaya speaking first, 
said: — 
" I can leap a hundred miles ! " and Gavaksha said : — " I 
can leap two hundred ! " Then the monkey Sharabha said to 
his companions : — " I am able to leap three hundred miles, 
O Monkeys ! " thereafter Rishabha said, " I can undoubtedly 
cross over four hundred miles 1 " and the mighty Gandhamadana 
said " I can leap five hundred miles ! " In his turn the monkey, 
Mainda, said " And I, six hundred miles " and the illustrious 
Dvivida " Without difficulty I can leap over seven hundred 
miles ! " Then Sushena, full of energy, the best of monkeys 
said, " I declare that I can leap eight hundred miles ! " 
And as they were speaking thus, the oldest of them, Jambavan, 
offering salutations to them all, spoke in this wise: — " Formerly I, 
also, had the power of motion but now I am advanced in years. 
Nevertheless in the present situation, nothing should be over looked to assure the success of both Rama's and the King of 
Monkeys' mission : I shall therefore leap three hundred miles. 
There is no doubt whatever about this." Then Jambavan, 
addressing all those monkeys, added : " Alas ! I have assuredly 
not the strength for that ! Of old, I circumambulated the eternal 
Vishnu when he covered the world in three strides at the sacrifice 
of Virochana's son ; now, however, I am old and tire quickly. 
When I was young, my energy was great and unmatched ; to day, I can only go as far as I have told you, which is not sufficient 
to bring success to our undertaking." 
Thereupon the sagacious Angada, bowing to that mighty 
monkey, addressed him in pregnant words, saying : "I am 
able to leap these four hundred miles easily but should I be able 
to return ? Nothing is certain ! " 
Thereat Jambavan answered that excellent monkey and said : 
" O Foremost of Monkeys, thy power of motion is well known, 
but art thou able to cross over eight hundred miles ?1 It is 
not fitting that thou shouldst do so. My Dear Son, the master 
must in no way be commanded by his servants ; it is for thee to 
order this expedition. Thou art our leader and our only good. 
The head of the army is, as it were, the wife, who should con stantly be protected ; this is thy role, O Dear Child. One 
1 That is, there and back. 
318 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
should take care of the root of a thing, this is the practice of 
men of experience ; the root being sound, the juices that have 
for their purpose the maturing of the fruit will be safeguarded. 
Thou art the essential part of this undertaking and, O Subduer 
of Thy Foes, thou, furnished with wisdom and valour, art the 
principle underlying it. Thou art our superior and the son of 
our superior, O Excellent One ; with thy support we shall be 
able to accomplish our mission." 
Thus, in his great wisdom, Jambavan spoke and that mighty 
monkey born of Bali, Angada, answered him saying : — - 
" If I do not go nor any among these powerful monkeys does 
so, then undoubtedly we must begin our supreme fast once 
more, for if we return without having fulfilled the commands 
of that lord of the monkeys, then I do not see how we can hope 
to preserve our lives. Whether he show clemency or wrath, 
he is the chief of the monkeys and to disregard his will means 
death. In this matter no other alternative is possible ; there fore it is for you who are able to see clearly to reflect upon it." 
Thus spoke Angada and that powerful and heroic monkey, 
Jambavan, answered him in felicitous words saying : — 
" O Warrior, this mission will be carried out without obstruc tion ! I will call on the one who is able to accomplish it." 
Thereupon that heroic monkey sent for the foremost of the 
apes, Hanuman, who was sitting tranquilly apart. 
CHAPTER 66 
Jambavan appeals to Hanuman to sacrifice himself for the good of all 
Perceiving the discouragement of that great army composed of 
hundreds and thousands of monkeys, Jambavan said to 
Hanuman : — 
" O Warrior, foremost among the multitude, thou who art 
versed in the scriptures, why art thou sitting apart, silent ? 
In courage and strength, thou art the equal of Rama and Laksh mana and of the King of the Monkeys himself, O Hanuman ! 
319 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
" ArishtanemiV son, the mighty Vainateya, the illustrious 
Garuda is the foremost of all winged creatures, Many a time 
I have seen that all-powerful bird of immense wings and exceed ing energy bearing away serpents from the ocean ; the strength 
that is in his wings resembles the might and vigour of thine arms; 
none can withstand thee. Thine energy, intelligence, courage 
and loyalty sets thee apart from the rest of beings, therefore 
prepare thyself to cross the ocean. 
" The most noble of all the Apsaras, Punjika-Thala, under the 
name of Anjana, became the wife of the monkey Kesarin. She 
was renowned in the three worlds and her beauty was unequalled 
on earth. As a result of a curse, O Friend, she was born in the 
monkey race, able to change her form at will. 
" Once that daughter of the king among the monkeys, Kunjara, 
having assumed the form of a woman radiant with youth and 
beauty, adorned with garlands of various kinds, clad in silk, 
was wandering about on the summit of a mountain, which 
resembled a mass of clouds in the rainy season. 
" And it happened that the God of the Wind stole away the 
red-bordered yellow robe of that large-eyed maiden, who stood 
on the mountain top. Then Maruta perceived her rounded, 
well-proportioned thighs and her breasts touching each other 
and her amiable and pleasing mien. Beholding that youthful 
woman of lovely limbs and slender waist, her whole being radiant 
with beauty, he was filled with desire and beside himself, en veloping that irreproachable lady in his arms, Manmatha em braced her. 
" In her distress, Anjana, faithful to her conjugal vows, cried 
out : — * Who desires to sever the ties of a woman devoted to her 
lord ? ' Hearing these words, the Wind-God answered, * I 
do not wish to wrong thee, O Lady of Lovely Hips, let not thy 
heart be troubled. By embracing thee and entering into thee 
thou shalt bear a son endowed with strength and intelligence, 
of immense energy, of noble nature, possessed of vigour and 
courage and in agility and speed equal to myself.' 
" These words pleased thy mother and she gave birth to thee 
in a cave, O Foremost of Monkeys. 
1 Arishtanerai — A name of Garuda meaning " the felly of whose wheel 
is unscathed ". 
3» 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
" While still a child, thou didst see the sun rise over the great 
forest and taking it to be a fruit sought to seize it. Bounding 
into the air, thou didst mount up for a thousand yojanas, O 
Great Monkey and, though the burning rays of the sun beat upon 
thee, thou didst not falter. Seeing thee rushing through space, 
Indra, full of wrath, hurled this thunderbolt at thee, whereupon, 
falling, thou didst fracture thy left jaw on the point of a rock 
from which arises thy name, Hanuman.1 Observing thee in this 
state, Vayu the Destroyer, the Bearer of Fragrance,* in the 
height of anger, ceased to blow throughout the Three Worlds. 
" Then all the Gods were distressed on account of the calamity 
that has befallen the worlds and these Lords of the Universe 
sought to pacify the wrathful Wind-god, whereupon Pavana 
being placated, Brahma accorded thee the boon of invulnera bility in combat. Seeing how thou didst sustain the impart of 
the thunderbolt, that God of a Thousand Eyes was pleased with 
thee and also conferred an excellent boon on thee, saying : — 
' Thou shalt not die till thou desireth to do so ! Thou, en- 
dowed with extreme vigour, the son of Kesarin, resembling the 
Wind God in energy, art born of his loins and equal to him in 
speed '. O Friend, we are lost, but thou, possessed of skill and 
courage, art in our midst a second Lord of the Monkeys. 
" In the time when Vishnu covered the world with three 
strides, I, O Child, circumambulated the earth with its mount ains, forests and woods, one and twenty times. Then com missioned by the Gods, we gathered all the herbs which (when 
cast into the sea) produced the nectar of immortality and at 
that time our strength was great. Now I am old and my 
prowess has deserted me, but thou, endowed with every virtue 
art amongst us. Employ thy valour, O Hero, for thou are most 
fitted to do so. Bestir thyself and cross the vast ocean, O 
Redoubtable Monkey; the entire monkey host is eager to 
behold thy prowess. Arise and leap over the mighty sea, for 
thou surpasseth all beings in motion. Canst thou remain in different to the despair of all the monkeys ? Put forth thy 
strength, as did Vishnu when traversing the Three Worlds with 
three strides, O Lion among Monkeys ! " 
1 Hanuman — " He of the fractured jaw ". 
* The Wind -god. 
321 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Thus exhorted by the foremost of monkeys, Hanuman, 
renowned for his great might, the son of the Wind, assumed a 
form preparatory to crossing the sea that gladdened the hearts 
of those monkeys. 
CHAPTER 67 
Hanuman prepares to go to Lanka 
Seeing that extremely agile leader of monkeys stretching him self in preparation for crossing the four hundred miles of sea, 
the monkeys, renouncing all despondency, were filled with 
delight and began to shout and praise the heroism of Hanuman. 
And, struck with amazement, beings from every sphere re joiced unitedly, even as when they beheld the Lord Himself 
displaying his powers, when taking the three strides. 
Thus acclaimed, the mighty Hanuman expanded in size and 
waved his tail in pleasure, demonstrating his strength. Ap plauded by the older monkeys and filled with energy, he assumed 
an unparalleled shape, like a lion that stretches himself at the 
mouth of a rocky cavern, and that Son of Maruta began to 
yawn and the mouth of that intelligent monkey resembled a 
blazing brazier or a smokeless fire. 
Rising in the midst of those monkeys, his hair standing on end 
for joy, he paid obeisance to the older leaders and said to them : — 
" I am the son of him who shatters the mountain peaks and is 
the friend of fire, the mighty and incommensurable Vayu, who 
circulates in space, Maruta, of impetuous bounds, rapid pace 
and great soul. A thousand times am I able without pausing, to 
encircle Mem, that colossus that seems to lick the heavens. 
With my strong arms, churning up the sea, I can inundate the 
world with its mountains, rivers and lakes ; with my thighs and 
legs, I can cause the ocean, the abode of Varuna with its great 
denizens, to overflow. I can encircle Vainateya, revered by all, 
who feeds on serpents, a thousand times while he courses once 
through space. What is more, I am able to reach the sun which 
rises in glory crowned with rays, before it sinks in the west and 
return without touching the earth. I can leap beyond the 
322 
KISHKINDHA KANDA 
stars and planets, suck up the ocean and rive the earth ; I can 
shatter the mountains with my bounds and in the immeasurable 
energy of my leaping I can cause the sea to overflow. When I 
mount into the sky, flowers from countless shrubs and trees will 
be borne away by me on my aerial course this day and studded 
with flowers my path shall resemble the Milky Way. 
" And, O Monkeys, all beings shall behold me coursing 
through the air, encompassing the firmament, now rising, now 
descending, as it were devouring space. I shall scatter the 
clouds, shatter the mountains and dry up the ocean with my 
constant leaping. My powers are equal to the eagle's or the 
wind ; I know of none that surpasses the King of the Birds, 
the Wind-god or myself. In the twinkling of an eye, I shall 
float through the air like lightning from a cloud. While crossing 
the sea, my form will resemble Vishnu's taking his three strides. 
My heart foretells that I shall encounter Vaidehi, therefore 
rejoice. Equal to Maruta in motion and Garuda in speed, I 
shall cover ten thousand miles ; this is my firm conviction. I 
am able to wrest the * amrita ' from Indra, armed with his thunder bolt or from Brahma himself. Be assured, that having turned 
Lanka upside down, I shall return ! " 
That monkey of immeasurable vigour roared thus, and astoun ded, the monkeys gazed on him with joy ; and hearing those words 
that dissipated the distress of his kindred, that foremost of 
monkeys, Jambavan, transported with delight, said : — " O Hero ! 
O Son ofKesarin! O Offspring of the Wind ! Thou hast dispelled 
the immense anxiety of thy fellows, and these foremost of 
monkeys assembled here will perform acts tending to thy 
welfare. By the grace of the Sages, the approval of our elders 
and the blessing of our spiritual preceptors do thou cross the 
ocean. We will stand on one foot awaiting thy return. On 
thee depend the lives of all the inhabitants of the woods ! " 
Then that tiger of the monkeys said to those rangers of the 
woods : — " None in this world will be able to sustain the force 
of my leaping. Here is the mountain Mahendra with its com* 
pact mass of rocks and high escarpments, it is from its summit 
that I shall spring. With its trees of varied fragrance that 
cover it and its many crags, it will be able to bear my weight, 
when I prepare to leap over four hundred miles." 
323 v 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
With these words that monkey, the scourge of his foes, born 
of Maruta, whose equal he was, scaled that monarch of 
mountains, carpeted with flowers of every kind and grassy 
swards ranged by deer, containing flowering creepers and trees 
laden with fruit and blossoms, frequented by lions and tigers 
and herds of intoxicated elephants maddened with ichor ; 
there flocks of birds trilled and waterfalls tumbled on every side. 
Ascending that mountain, that foremost of monkeys, equal to 
Mahendra in power, began to wander from one crest to another 
and crushed between the arms of that high-souled one, that great 
mountain emitted a loud clamour, like a mighty elephant that 
has been attacked by a lion and waters gushed out from the 
scattered rocks and deer and elephants were seized with fear, 
whilst the giant trees shook. 
Its spacious uplands were deserted by the-pairs of Gandharvas 
engaged in drinking and dalliance, the birds flew away and the 
bands of Vidyadharas fled from the high plateaus ; the huge 
serpents hid themselves in terror and the cliffs and spars broke 
away. With its serpents hissing, their bodies half issuing from 
their holes, the mountain shone, as if decorated by pennants. 
The Rishis in fear and agitation fled from that support of the 
earth so that it resembled a wayfarer in a vast forest, deserted by 
his companions. 
And that agile and valiant monkey, endowed with great speed, 
the destroyer of his foes, filled with an exalted purpose, had 
already reached Lanka in thought. 
End of Kishkindha Kanda 
BOOK V. 
SUNDARA KANDA 
CHAPTER I 
The Departure of Hanuman 
Then that Scourge of His Foes, Hanuman, prepared to follow 
the path of the Charanas1 in quest of the place to which Sita 
had been borne away by Ravana. 
Desirous of accomplishing this difficult feat without hindrance, 
impossible to any other, that powerful monkey, stretching 
out his head and neck like a bull, frightening the birds, up rooting the trees with his breast and destroying innumerable 
creatures, like a lion overflowing with energy joyfully bounded 
over the grassy slopes resembling the sea. 
On that mountain plateau, frequented by the Chiefs of the 
Serpent Race, embellished by blue, red, yellow, rose and various 
coloured metals, thronged with Celestial Beings, Yakshas, 
Kinneras and Gandharvas, able to change their form at will, 
that foremost of monkeys stood like a Naga in a lake. 
Then, having paid homage to the Sun-god, Mahendra, 
Pavana, Swyambhu and all beings, he prepared to set out on his 
journey. Turning towards the east and saluting his sire, the 
resourceful Hanuman, having resolved to cross the ocean to fulfil 
Rama's purpose, in order to reach the southern region, expanded 
his body under the eyes of the leaders of the monkeys, as the 
sea increases under the full moon. 
Assuming an immense stature, desirous of traversing the 
ocean, he pressed the mountain with his hands and feet and that 
immoveable peak shook under his weight and all the blossom 
from the tops of the trees fell in a shower wholly covering it 
with a mass of fragrant blooms. 
Under the extreme pressure of that monkey's weight, water 
gushed forth from the mountain like ichor from the temples of 
an elephant in rut. Trampled underfoot by that mighty forest 
327 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
dweller, the mountain let loose innumerable streams of gold, 
silver and collyrium and, from that rocky mass, enormous 
boulders detached themselves containing red arsenic so that it 
resembled a brazier wreathed in smoke. 
Crushed on every side by the monkey, those creatures, 
dwelling in the caverns, bruised and stifled, emitted strange cries 
and the formidable clamour created by them filled the whole 
earth and other regions. 
Great serpents, rearing their distinctive hoods, vomited fire 
and bit the rocks with their fangs and those great crags, split 
by the venom, broke into flames and were shivered into a 
thousand fragments. The medicinal herbs also, which grew 
there, were affected by the poison which they were unable to 
neutralise. 
Then the ascetics, terrified, reflecting that the mountain was 
being riven by great Beings, fled away, as well as the Vidya dharas with their attendant women. Forsaking their golden 
seats, goblets and precious vessels with the ewers of gold in the 
feasting hall ; abandoning the priceless sauces, wines and viands 
of every kind and the bides and swords with guards of Kanaka 
gold ; intoxicated, their necks encircled with jewelled chains, 
adorned with garlands and red sandal paste, their eyes resembling 
blue lotuses, they rose into the air ; and those fair Ones, 
wearing strings of pearls, rings and bracelets, startled, ascended 
smiling into the sky, close to their loved ones. 
Witnessing this great marvel, Maharishis and Vidyadharas 
stood in the firmament gazing down on the mountain and they 
heard those pure-minded ascetics saying : " This Hanuman, 
born of the Wind, endued with great energy, desirous of crossing 
the ocean, the abode of Varuna, in order to carry out Rama's 
purpose and that of the monkeys, is eager to reach the further 
shore, a most difficult feat." 
Hearing the words of the ascetics, the Vidyadharas beheld that 
foremost of monkeys on the mountain, bristling and quivering 
like a flame, emitting a great roar like the rumble of thunder. 
Then raising his tail which twitched convulsively, like a snake 
shaken by an eagle, he waved it to and fro and, lying curled 
across his back, it resembled a great serpent borne away by 
Garuda. 
328 
SUNDARA KANDA 
And that monkey, stiffening his arms like unto two immense 
clubs, girded up his limbs and, crouching down, contracted his 
neck and arms, summoning up all his strength and courage. 
Scanning the path he was to take and examining the distance to 
be covered, he drew in bis breath, pressing his two feet firmly 
on the ground and that elephant among monkeys, Hanuman, 
flattening his ears, leapt forward and, full of energy, addressed 
the forest dwellers, saying : 
" As an arrow loosed by Raghava flies with the speed of the 
wind so shall I course to Lanka which is guarded by Ravana. 
If I fail to find the daughter of Janaka there, I shall repair with 
the same speed to the region of the Gods, where, if despite 
mine efforts I do not recover Sita, I shall bring back the King of 
the Titans in chains. Either, achieving success, I shall return 
or uprooting Lanka from its foundation, I shall bear it hither, 
together with Ravana." 
With these words, Hanuman, the foremost of monkeys, 
without pausing for breath, deeming himself to be a second 
Suparna, sprang into the air and, such was the force of his leap, 
that the trees growing on the mountain, tossing their branches, 
were sent spinning on every side. 
In his rapid flight, Hanuman bore away those trees with their 
flowering boughs filled with lapwings intoxicated with love, 
into the empyrean. Carried away by the impetus of his tre mendous bound, those trees followed in bis wake, like relatives 
accompanying their dear one setting out on a journey to a far 
country. Uprooted by the force of his motion, Sala and other 
forest trees followed in Hanuman's wake, like an army its leader. 
Surrounded by countless trees, the crests of which were laden 
with blossom, the monkey Hanuman, resembling a glorious 
mountain, was wonderful to behold. And those great trees, 
full of sap, fell into the sea, as formerly the mountains in fear of 
Indra plunged into Varuna's abode. 
Covered with flowers of every kind, as well as young shoots 
and buds, that monkey shone like a cloud or a hill aglow with 
fireflies. Torn away by his leaping, those trees, scattering their 
blossom here and there, plunged into the sea, like friends who, 
having escorted one of their company, return. Borne away in 
their fragility by the wind produced by the monkey's impetuous 
329 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
flight, which had detached them from their stems, the multi coloured flowers fell into the sea. 
Covered with a drift of fragrant blooms of diverse tints, that 
monkey, in his flight, resembled a mass of clouds embellished by 
lightning and the waters strewn with the blossom of his leap, 
looked like the firmament when the enchanting stars appear. 
His two arms outstretched in space, resembled two five-headed 
serpents issuing from the summit of a mountain. 
Sometimes that mighty monkey seemed to be drinking up the 
ocean with the multitudinous waves and sometimes it seemed as 
if he would swallow the sky itself. As he thus followed the 
wind's path, his eyes, shining like lightning, sparkled like two 
fires that have been kindled on a mountain. 
The eyes of that tawny-hued one resembled the sun and moon 
in juxtaposition, and his coppery nose lent his countenance the 
same hue as the solar orb at the approach of dusk ; his uplifted 
tail caused that offspring of the wind to appear like the raised 
banner of Indra. With his coiled tail and white teeth, that 
exceedingly sagacious son of Anila, Hanuman, shone like the 
star of day encircled by a halo of rays and his plump form, of a 
copper}' hue, caused him to resemble a mountain which is being 
excavated for its deposits of red ochre. Bounding over the 
waters, the air imprisoned in the armpits of that leonine monkey, 
emitted a sound like thunder. 
As in space, a meteor from a higher region rushes through the 
skies so did that elephant of monkeys appear or like a great 
bird soaring into the air or a great tusker tightly-bound by a 
girth, whilst the reflection of his body cast on the deep resembled 
a vessel foundering in a storm. 
Wherever that great monkey passed, the sea rose tumultuously 
under the force of his bounds and, rushing on with extreme 
speed, with his breast like a great prow, he caused the salty sea 
to surge mountainously. Pushing those high heaving billows 
before him, that lion among monkeys seemed to be separating 
heaven and earth ; the waves that rose up resembled Mount 
Meru and Mandara and, breasted by him in his impetuous 
course, the waters lashed by bis speed, overspread the sky like 
autumnal clouds. Whales, crocodiles, huge fish and turtles 
were uncovered in turn, like the limbs of one shedding bis 
330 
SUNDARA KANDA 
attire, and sea serpents, beholding that lion among monkeys 
travelling through space took him to be Suparna himself. 
The shadow of that great monkey, forty miles in extent and 
thirty wide, grew larger in the rapidity of his flight and, re sembling a mass of white clouds, falling on the salty waters, 
looked exceedingly beautiful. That supremely illustrious and 
mighty monkey of vast body appeared like a winged mountain 
as he followed his aerial path without rest. 
Wherever that mighty elephant among the monkeys passed, 
the sea was instantly transformed into a fountain and, following 
the path of the birds, Hanuman, like the King of the feathered 
tribe, thrust aside the massed clouds like the Wind-god 
himself. Great clouds, red, blue, pate or dark, scattered by the 
monkey's flight, looked exceedingly beautiful and he, now 
entering into them, sometimes hidden sometimes visible, 
resembled the moon. 
Seeing that Plavaga1 coursing with such speed, the Gods, 
Gandharvas and Danavas began to rain flowers on him and, 
as he sailed on, the sun refrained from tormenting him and the 
wind ministered to him for the sake of Rama's enterprise. 
Then the Rishis praised that dweller of the woods as he was 
coursing through the sky and the Gods and Gandharvas 
extolled him in song. Seeing him bounding in space, Nagas, 
Yakshas and Rakshasas of various races lauded that excellent 
monkey and the ocean, ever solicitous for the honour of the 
House of Ikshwaku, reflected : — " If I do not lend assistance to 
this Lord of Monkeys, I shall be an object of obloquy to all 
those gifted with speech ; was I not reared by Sagara, the 
foremost of the race of Ikshwaku ? This monkey is their 
counsellor, it is therefore incumbent on me not to let him perish 
in the waves. It behoves me to act in such wise that he may 
rest and, thus relieved by me, he will happily traverse the 
remaining way." 
In this magnanimous thought, the sea addressed that most 
excellent of mountains, the golden-hued Mainaka, which was 
covered by waves, saying : — 
" Thou hast been placed here by the King of the Celestials, as 
a rampart against trie Asuras inhabiting the nether regions. 
1 Plavaga. — One who moves by leaps and bounds. 
331 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Their power is well known and, lest they rise up anew from that 
hell of immeasurable dimensions, thou art here to prevent their 
escape. Nevertheless thou art able to move upwards and down wards and from side to side. I command thee, therefore, O 
Best of Mountains, to rise up. That lion among monkeys, 
performer of mighty exploits, engaged in Rama's service, over come with fatigue is passing over thee ; thou art witness of his 
exertions, now lift thyself up ! " 
Hearing the Ocean's words, the golden-breasted Mountain 
Mainaka with its tall trees and creepers, instantly rose from its 
watery bed and, as the sun with its burning rays divides the 
cloud, that great mountain, which the waters had concealed, on 
Sagara's request, exposed its golden peaks inhabited by Kinneras 
and great serpents, shimmering like the sun at dawn, as if it 
were licking the skies. The summits of that high mountain, 
shining like a sword, possessed the brilliance of gold and its 
gilded crests emitted a dazzling light lending it the lustre of a 
thousand suns. 
Beholding that mountain suddenly emerge before him from 
the middle of the sea, Hanuman reflected : ' This is an obstacle ', 
and that mighty and impetuous monkey crushed that stony mass 
with his breast as the wind scatters the clouds ; then that fore most of mountains, recognizing the power of Hanuman, shouted 
for joy. Thereupon, assuming the form of a man, stationing 
himself on his own summit, with a glad heart he addressed 
Hanuman saying : — 
" O Most Excellent of Forest Dwellers, thou hast undertaken 
an arduous task, take thine ease on my crest and continue 
without fatigue. The ocean king was born in the House of 
Raghu and, seeing thee engaged on Rama's behalf, offers 
obeisance to thee. To render service for service is the divine 
decree. Desirous of serving Raghu's race, he is worthy of thy 
consideration. To do thee honour, the Sea God adjured me 
thus : — 
" * Traversing a hundred yojanas through the air, this monkey 
is worn out by bis exertions, let him rest awhile on thy summit 
and continue his way without fatigue.' Do thou therefore re main here, O Best of Monkeys and repose thyself. Having 
feasted on these many sweet and fragrant fruits and roots, 
332 
SUNDARA KANDA 
proceed on thy course at thy leisure. O Foremost of Monkeys, 
the sum of thy virtues is well-known in the Three Worlds. O 
Son of the Wind, of all the Plavagas who abound in energy, I 
esteem thee to be the chief, O Lion among Monkeys ! Even an 
ordinary man is honoured as a guest by one conversant with his 
duty, how much more one such as thou ? Thou art the Son of 
Maruta, the Foremost of the Celestials and dost equal him in 
speed, O Best of Monkeys ! In honouring thee, who art con versant with virtue, one is honouring thy sire, therefore thou 
dost merit my reverence. Hearken, there is a further reason 
for this : 
" In olden times, Dear Child, the mountains, endowed with 
wings, began to range the four quarters with the speed of 
Garuda, and journeying thus, the companies of Celestials, 
ascetics and other Beings trembled with fear lest they should 
fall. Then, highly enraged, the God of a Thousand Eyes, the 
performer of an hundred sacrifices severed the wings of those 
hundreds and thousands of mountains with his thunderbolt. 
" When, full of wrath, the Lord of the Celestials approached 
me, brandishing his mace, I was suddenly swept away by that 
high-souled Wind-god. O Foremost of Monkeys, I was thus 
cast into the salty waves and, retaining my wings, was preserved 
unhurt by thine ancestor. On account of this, thou art an 
object of adoration to me and this is the powerful bond which 
unites us, O Chief of the Monkeys. The time for honouring 
the benefit conferred having come, it behoves thee to accord this 
felicity to the Ocean and myself, O Illustrious One ! Repose 
thyself therefore and accept our homage, who are worthy of thy 
respect, O Venerable Hanuman ! Happy am I to see thee here ! " 
Thus accosted by Mainaka, the foremost of mountains, that 
excellent monkey answered, saying : — " I am grateful for thy 
welcome but time presses and I have vowed not to rest on the 
way ; day is declining, let nothing disturb thy serenity." 
Then, touching the mountain with his hand, that lion among 
monkeys, smiling, sailed on through the air, whereupon the 
mountain and the ocean offered him their respect and gave him 
their blessings. Rising high into the sky, he looked down on the 
mountain and the vast ocean and proceeded unsupported in 
the pathway of the wind. 
333 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Seeing Hanuman achieve this difficult feat, the Celestial 
Beings and the ascetics acclaimed him ; then the Gods present, 
in their turn, applauded the action of that golden mountain of 
beautiful slopes, as did Indra, the Thousand-eyed Deity also, 
and supremely gratified, the consort of Sachi paid homage to 
that illustrious mountain personally, saying : — 
" O Lord of Mountains, I am extremely pleased with thee ! 
I grant thee full security, proceed therefore where thou desirest, 
O Friend. Thou hast fearlessly offered assistance to Hanuman, 
who was exhausted after crossing four hundred miles of sea, 
despite every hazard. It is on Rama's behalf, the Son of King 
Dasaratha, that the monkey has undertaken this journey and 
thou hast welcomed him to the best of thy power, I am well 
pleased with thee ! " 
Beholding the King of the Gods, Shatakratu highly gratified, 
that foremost of mountains experienced supreme felicity and 
having received that boon from Indra, resumed its former place. 
Then Hanuman, in a short space, sped over the sea. 
Thereupon the Gods, Gandharvas and Siddhas with the 
ascetics called upon Surasa, the Mother of Serpents, who 
resembled the sun, saying : — 
" The effulgent Son of the Wind is crossing the main, it is 
for thee to delay him awhile Assuming the form of a terrible 
Rakshasi, as high as a mountain, with monstrous jaws and 
coppery eyes, do thou reach up to the sky. We desire to test his 
strength and measure his fortitude to see if he is able to over come thee or if he retires discomfited." 
At these words, Surasa, having been honoured by the Gods, 
rose from the ocean in the form of a female demon, deformed and 
hideous, inspiring terror in all beings and, staying Hanuman in 
his flight, addressed him saying : — 
" O Foremost of Monkeys, thou hast been destined by the 
Lords of the World to be my food, I am about to devour thee, 
do thou enter my mouth ! This boon was formerly granted to 
me by Dhatar." 
With these words she opened her vast mouth wide, placing 
herself in Maruti's path. 
Having listened to Surasa's speech, Hanuman, smiling, 
answered her : — 
334 
SUNDARA KANDA 
" Rama, the Son of Dasaratha, who retired to the Dandaka 
forest with Lakshmana his brother, and Vaidehi his consort, 
as a result of a certain exploit, became the enemy of the demons. 
His beloved wife, the illustrious Sita was subsequently carried 
away by Ravana. I have been sent to her on Rama's behalf, 
to whom thou shouldst proffer assistance, O Thou who in habitest his dominion. Having found Maithili and rejoined 
Rama, whose deeds are memorable, I shall return and enter 
thy mouth, this I promise thee in good faith.** 
Thus addressed by Hanuman, Surasa, who was able to change 
her form at will, answered : — " None shall pass me alive, this is 
the boon I have received." Then seeing him continue on his 
way, the Mother of Serpents added : — " I have received this 
favour from Brahma, first enter my mouth then go thy way." 
Thereafter, extending her capacious jaws, she placed herself 
in front of Maruti. Surasa's words incensed that lion among 
monkeys and he said : — 
" Open thy mouth wide enough to swallow me." Having 
said this in anger, Surasa extended her jaws to the width of forty 
miles and Hanuman increased his girth accordingly ; thereat 
Surasa enlarged her mouth to fifty miles, and seeing the jaws 
of Surasa wide open with its long tongue, terrible to look upon, 
resembling a mountain, measuring fifty miles, Hanuman 
enlarged himself to that extent also. Then Surasa increased her 
mouth to sixty miles and the heroic Hanuman to seventy, 
whereupon Surasa widened her jaws to eighty miles, and 
Hanuman, resembling Fire1 itself, to ninety miles. Then 
Surasa enlarged her mouth to the extent of an hundred miles 
and Hanuman, reducing his body like a cloud to the size of a 
thumb's breadth entered into her mouth and, re-emerging 
from it, standing in space, addressed her saying : — 
" O Dakshayani, salutations to thee, I have entered thy 
mouth, now I go to seek out Vaidehi. Thy boon has been 
honoured 1" 
Seeing Hanuman emerging from her mouth like the moon 
from the mouth of Rahu, that goddess, assuming her own form, 
said to the monkey : — 
" Go, O Best of Monkeys ! Accomplish thy mission. Thou 
1 Lit. : The Fire-god. 
335 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
hast done well, O Friend ! Now restore Sita to the magnani mous Raghava ! " 
Seeing this third supremely difficult feat accomplished by 
Hanuman, all beings extolled that monkey, crying : ' Excellent ! 
Excellent J ' paying obeisance to him ; and he, flying into the sky, 
with the speed of Garuda, went on across the sea, the abode of 
Varuna, coursing through the air which was filled with clouds, 
where birds ranged and which was frequented by Vidyadharas 
and shining vehicles drawn by lions, elephants, tigers and 
winged serpents. And Maruti, scattering the clouds like the 
wind itself, sailed on like Garuda through that firmament, 
which was illumined by flashes of lightning, resembling the five 
fires, inhabited by beings, who, by their merits had conquered 
heaven, occupied by the Deity of Fire bearing the sacrificial 
oblations. Adorned by the constellations of planets, the 
sun, the moon and hosts of stars ; thronged with Maharishis, 
Gandharvas, Nagas and Yakshas ; pure, stainless, immense ; 
inhabited by Vishvavasu ; trodden by the elephant of the King 
of the Gods, that orbit of the sun and the moon, the canopy of 
the world, stretched by Brahma over the earth, was visited by 
countless heroes and aerial beings. 
Mighty clouds, shining with the tints of Kalaguru,1 red, 
yellow and black, sparkled with brilliance as they were dispelled 
by Hanuman and he, penetrating those cloudy battlements, 
emerged once more as the moon in the rainy season disappears 
and re-appears in the clouds. Everywhere the son of Maruta 
could be seen cleaving the air like the King of the Mountains 
furnished with wings. 
Seeing him sailing through space, a female demon of immense 
size, named Singhika, who was able to change her form at will, 
said to herself : — ' To-day, after a long time, I shall be able to 
satisfy my hunger ! That great creature has appeared in answer 
to my wish ! * 
Reflecting thus in her heart, she seized Hanuman's shadow, 
and he, feeling it held fast, thought : * My power has suddenly 
been dissipated like a mighty barque which is retarded in its 
course by an adverse wind ! ' Then looking round on every 
side, Hanuman perceived that immense being rising from the 
1 Kalagu.ru — Agallochura : A species of sandal paste. 
33« 
SUNDARA KANDA 
salty waves. Seeing that monster, the Son of the Wind-god, 
reflected : — * This is without doubt that creature of wonderful 
form, possessed of exceeding power, given to securing its prey 
by means of theit shadow, vtto ms <&s&afeft& \<o \n£ ty ti&fc 
monkey king.' Concluding by her action that it was Singhika, 
that sagacious monkey expanded his frame to gigantic pro portions so that he resembled a mass of cloud during the 
rains. 
When the demon saw the enlarged body of that mighty 
monkey, she extended her jaws so that they resembled the sky 
and the nether regions and, roaring like thunder, hurled herself 
upon him, but marking the proportions of her mouth and the 
vulnerable parts of her body, that intelligent monkey, hard as a 
diamond, contracting his limbs, threw himself into her 
jaws. 
And the Siddhas and Charanas beheld him diving into her 
mouth, disappearing like the moon devoured by Rami at the 
time of eclipse. And Hanuman, with his sharp nails tore the 
entrails of that demon and, with the rapidity of thought, emerged, 
having slain her by his acuteness, endurance and skill and, having 
overthrown her, began to expand once more. Thereafter that 
hero among monkeys suddenly regained his power, whilst Sing hika, deprived of life by him, torn asunder, sank into the waves, 
Swyambhu having created him for her destruction. 
Perceiving Singhika speedily overcome by him, all the beings 
who range the skies addressed that foremost of monkeys saying : 
" Tremendous is this deed that thou hast performed this day ! 
Mighty was this monster whom thou hast slain. O Illustrious 
Monkey, now pursue the purpose dear to thine heart without 
hindrance. He, who like thee, possesses the four attributes : 
fixity of purpose, circumspection, wisdom and ability, does not 
fail in his enterprise O Indra among Monkeys ! " 
Honoured by those whose wishes are fulfilled, as he merited 
to be, that monkey flew into the sky like Garuda, the devourer 
of serpents. Then, having reached the further shore, Hanuman 
looking round on every side, observed countless woods a 
hundred miles distant and, as he went on, that leader of forest 
dwellers saw an island adorned with trees of various kinds and 
thickets belonging to the Malaya mountains ; and he surveyed 
337 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
the sea and the lands bordering it and the trees growing on its 
shores as also the mouths of the ocean's consorts.1 
Gazing down on his own body which resembled a great cloud 
covering the sky that self-contained monkey reflected : " Ob serving mine immense stature and the rapidity of my flight the 
demons will be seized with curiosity concerning me." 
Thinking thus, in his great prudence, he contracted his body, 
which was the size of a mountain and assumed his ordinary 
form as one whose wits have been scattered resumes his normal 
state. Abandoning his gigantic dimensions, he took on his 
native form, as did Vishnu, the depriver of Bali's power, when 
he made the three strides. 
Constantly mindful of his mission, Hanuman, who was able 
to assume various graceful forms, having crossed the sea, a feat 
not to be accomplished by any other, reduced his body to its 
former size. 
Thereafter that high-souled One, resembling a cloudy 
pavilion, alighted on the summit of the glorious mountain Samva, 
of many splendid peaks which was covered with Ketaka, 
Uddalaka and Narikela trees. 
Reaching the shore of the sea, the monkey beholding Lanka 
on the top of the foremost of mountains, descended, having 
assumed his native form, causing agitation among the deer and 
birds. 
Through his valour having traversed the ocean heaving with 
waves and abounding in Danavas and Pannagas, Hanuman, 
alighang on the further shore, beheld Lanka which resembled 
the dry of Amaravati. 
CHAPTER 2 
Hanuman* s Arrival in Lanka 
Having crossed the unconquerable sea, that mighty monkey, 
standing on the summit of the Trikuta Mountain, surveyed 
1 Ocean's Consorts: Probably eatuaries. 
338 
SUNDARA KANDA 
Lanka and that ape endowed with great prowess was covered 
by a shower of blossom that fell from the trees on every side, 
nor did that fortunate monkey, who had just traversed many 
hundreds of miles of sea without pausing for breath, experience 
any fatigue. 
' I am able to journey many hundreds of miles, what then is 
this ocean measuring four hundred miles only ? ' Thus think ing, that foremost of monkeys, endowed with great energy, 
turned quickly towards Lanka, having crossed the mighty ocean 
and he passed between green fields and dense thickets fragrant 
with the scent of honey and traversed the mountainous district 
covered with trees and blossoming woods. Stationing himself 
there, the Son of the Wind-god beheld forests and groves and 
Lanka itself perched on the summit of the mountain. 
Sarala, Karnikara, Kharjura trees in full flower with the 
balmy Priyala, Muchulinda, Kutaja, Ketaka and Priyangu 
trees heavy with scent ; Nipa, Saptachchada, Asana, Kovidara 
and Karavira trees laden with buds and flowers, whose crests, 
waving in the wind abounded with birds, were seen by him and 
ponds filled with swans and waterfowl and carpeted with white 
and blue lotuses; flower gardens with ornamental fountains 
and marvellous parks planted with every kind of tree which 
yielded fruit and flowers in every season. 
Drawing nearer to Lanka, which was protected by Ravana, 
surrounded by a moat embellished with blue and white lotuses, 
the auspicious Hanuraan noted that a strong guard had been 
placed round it since Sita's abduction; and demons with for midable bows ranged it on every side and that great and mar vellous city was encircled by a golden wall, its buildings as high 
as mountains, resembling autumn clouds. 
The main highways were lined with tall white buildings with 
hundreds of turrets decorated with flying pennants and banners. 
Most wonderful, with its golden archways festooned with climb ing plants, the city of Lanka appeared to Hanuman to be like 
the city of the Gods. Built on the summit of a mountain, with 
its palaces of dazzling white, it resembled an aerial city. Con structed by Vishwakarma and ruled by the Lord of the Titans 
himself, it seemed to that monkey to be suspended in the sky 
with its ramparts as the thighs, the stretches of water and woods, 
339 z 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
the raiment, Sbataghnis1 and spears the hair, the terraces the 
diadem, Lanka resembled a woman, a creation of Vishwakarma's 
thought. 
Reaching the northern gate resembling Mount Kailasha, 
which seemed to cleave the skies and support the firmament 
with its splendid lofty towers and, observing that city thronged 
with ferocious titans, like a cavern full of venomous snakes, 
protected by the ocean and, recollecting that terrible adversary, 
Ravana, the monkey reflected : — 
* Even should the mighty armed Raghava succeed in reaching 
this dread and impregnable city protected by Ravana, what 
could he do ? It is not possible to enter into negotiations with 
these demons nor could one win them over by bribes nor 
succeed in sowing dissension among them nor overcome them 
in fight. Among the monkeys, only four have power to reach 
this place — Bali's son, Nila, the sagacious Sugriva, and I. But 
first let me ascertain if Vaidehi still lives or no ; after 
seeing Janaka's daughter, I shall consider these matters 
further.' 
Then that elephant among monkeys, stationed on the summit 
of the mountain, bethought himself how he could discover Sita, 
the delight of Rama. * In this shape I shall not be able to enter 
the city guarded by valiant and ferocious demons nor outwit 
those warriors full of courage, energy and prowess. In order 
to find Janaki, I must enter the city by night at a favourable 
moment, in a form which will not attract attention so that I may 
carry through this great enterprise.' 
Beholding that city, inaccessible even to the Gods and Asuras, 
Hanuman, sighing deeply, reflected within himself : * How can 
I succeed in finding Maithili, the daughter of Janaka, without 
being discovered by the perfidious Ravana, Lord of the Demons ? 
How may the work of Rama, who is cognisant of the Self, not be 
brought to nought ? How may I see the daughter of Janaka 
alone and in secret ? Undertakings fail in the face of hindrances 
raised by time and place or through the fault of an incompetent 
messenger, as darkness is dispelled by the rising sun. When it 
concerns that which should be undertaken or avoided, the best 
laid plans may come to nought through the heedlessness of a 
1 See Glossary of Weapon*. 
340 
SUNDARA KANDA 
messenger nor do they appear in all their splendour ; a pre sumptuous messenger may spoil all ! 
* How shall I act so that there shall be no incompetence on 
my part ? How may my crossing of the ocean bear fruit ? 
If I am discovered by the demons, the project which the sagaci ous Rama has formed, who desires the destruction of Ravana, 
will miscarry. Even if I assume the form of a demon I cannot 
remain here long without being discovered by them, how much 
less in some other shape. Even the wind is not able to circulate 
here unrecognized, I deem. Nothing escapes the vigilance of 
these formidable titans. If I remain here in my native form, I 
shall be courting disaster and the purpose of my master will be 
frustrated, therefore, reducing my size, I shall enter Lanka as a 
monkey in order to carry through Rama's design. Entering 
this inaccessible city by night, I shall penetrate into every dwell ing in order to find Janaka's daughter.' 
Having thus resolved, Hanuman, eager to find Vaidehi, 
waited for the sun to set. 
When the day's orb had sunk behind the Asta Mountain, 
Maruii reduced his body to the size of a cat, extraordinary to 
behold and, in the dusk, the mighty Hanuman, springing up, 
entered that marvellous city traversed by wide streets with rows 
of houses adorned with golden pillars and balconies, which 
lent it the appearance of a city of the Gandharvas. 
Then he beheld that capital containing seven and eight storied 
buildings with marble floors inlaid with golden mosaic and 
golden archways, lending it a great brilliance and, seeing the 
unimaginable splendour of Lanka, in his eagerness to find 
Vaidehi, he experienced both sadness and delight. 
With its garlands of palaces rivalling each other in whiteness 
and the arches interlaced with gold of great price, that magnifi cent city protected by Ravana was encircled by intrepid 
warriors of great prowess. 
And the moon at its full with its flocks of stars seemed to be 
ministering to Hanuman and, with its myriad rays, filled the 
worlds with its light. Then that hero among monkeys gazed 
on the moon shining like a conch-shell, white as milk or a lotus 
stalk that, floating all luminous in space, resembled a swan 
swimming on a lake. 
341 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 3 
Hanuman enters the City 
Having rested on Mount Samva of lofty summits, that resembled 
a great cloud, Hanuman, the son of Maruta, that lion among 
monkeys, confident of his own strength, entered Lanka by night, 
with its wealth of ravishing groves and waters, guarded by 
Ravana ; that enchanting city with its dazzling palaces re- 
sembling autumn clouds, where the sound of the sea could be 
heard, the breezes of which it inhaled day and night. 
Prosperous, surrounded by great forces, resembling Vitapavati 
with its white gates and decorated arches, protected by infuri ated elephants, splendid as Bhogavati filled with huge serpents, 
similar to the city of Indra, embellished by hosts of stars, 
resounding to the clamour of blustering winds, encircled by a 
golden rampart, re-echoing to the pealing of innumerable bells 
and adorned with banners, that city was approached by Hanuman 
in exaltation, his heart full of wonder. 
And he surveyed it on every side, with its golden gates, the 
lintels of emerald and the pavements studded with pearls, 
crystal and gems ; with its steps inlaid with precious stones, and 
floors of lapis lazuli, the grilles of refined gold and parapets of 
silver ; the stairways of crystal that, free from dust, were 
possessed of emerald treads. And there were charming rooms, 
which, on account of their elegance, seemed to be built in the air. 
The cries of curlews and peacocks could be heard and geese 
frequented that place whilst swans floated majestically on the 
lakes ; everywhere the sound of the beating of drums and the 
tinkling of ornaments resounded and, beholding Lanka that 
resembled Vasvakara and seemed to be built in space, the 
monkey was filled with rapture. 
Gazing on that splendid city belonging to the Lord of the 
Titans, that no other surpassed in opulence, the sagacious 
Hanuman reflected : — * This capital, protected by Ravana's 
warriors is not to be subdued by force and is only accessible 
to Kumuda, Angada and that mighty monkey, Sushena or 
342 
SUNDARA KANDA 
Mainda and Dvivida or the offspring of Vivaswata or the 
monkey Kushaparva or Rikshya, that foremost of monkeys, or 
myself/ 
Thereafter, recollecting the valour of the long-armed Raghava 
and the prowess of Lakshmana, the confidence of that monkey 
was restored. 
And that mighty monkey surveyed Lanka, the capital of the 
Lord of the Titans, that had the sea as her raiment, cow sheds 
and stables for her pendants, the armouries her breasts, decked 
out like a woman, where darkness was dispelled by the bright 
light of torches and the gleaming of the stars. 
And as that tiger among monkeys, son of the great Wind-god, 
entered the city, the Deity who presided over the capital pro tected by Ravana, she of monstrous aspect, rose up and barred 
the way of that heroic son of Vayu. Emitting a great roar, she 
challenged the offspring of the Wind-god, saying : — 
" O Dweller of the Forest, who art thou and for what purpose 
hast thou come hither ? Answer truthfully if thou dost value 
thy life ! Under no pretext wilt thou be able to obtain entry 
into this Lanka protected by the forces of Ravana, which patrol 
it on every side." 
Then the valiant Hanuman answered her, who stood before 
him, saying : — '* I shall tell thee ail about that on which thou 
questioned me anon but say first who thou art in this hideous 
form and why thou dost admonish me in anger, O Irascible 
One." 
Hearing Hanuman's words, the Goddess of Lanka, able to 
change her shape at will, waxed wrath and in harsh tones 
addressed the son of the Wind-god, saying : — 
" Obedient to the mandate of the magnanimous Ravana, the 
King of the Titans, I guard the city. None may pass me, yet 
if any should contrive to enter here, he will soon fall under my 
blows, deprived of his life breaths. I am the city of Lanka 
itself, and whatever betide I shall remain true to the words I 
have uttered ! " 
Hanuman, born of Maruta, the foremost of monkeys, stood 
motionless like a rock and beholding her in the form of a woman, 
that lion among monkeys, endowed with intelligence and courage, 
spoke to her thus : — 
343 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
" I wish to behold this city with its turrets, walls and arches, 
and have come hither for this purpose. Great is my desire to 
see it and explore its woods, groves and gardens, as also its 
great buildings." 
Hearing these words, the presiding Deity of Lanka, who was 
able to change her form at will, was still further provoked 
and answered in anger : — 
" O Insensate One, O Last of the Monkeys ! without over coming me, thou canst not behold this city to-day, which is 
ruled over by the King of the Titans." 
Then that lion among forest dwellers replied to that female 
ranger of the night, saying : — " After viewing the city, O 
Auspicious One, I shall return from whence I came." 
On this, Lanka emitted a terrible cry and struck that excellent 
monkey with the palm of her hand. Under the force of her 
blow, the valiant Son of Maruta let out a roar and closing the 
fingers of his left hand, pushed her away with his fist. Reflect ing ' She is a woman ' he controlled his anger, nevertheless the 
demon fell to the ground instantly, her face distorted and, seeing 
her lying on the earth, Hanuman, who was full of courage and 
nobility, had compassion on her, she being but a woman. 
Thereupon, Lanka, exceedingly agitated, addressed that 
monkey in low and faltering accents, saying : — 
" O Mighty-armed One, have pity on me ! Spare me, O 
Best of Monkeys ! Those endowed with strength and prowess, 
stay their hand betimes ! O Thou of great might, thou hast 
overcome me by thy valour ! Hear the following truth from me 
which was proclaimed by Swyambhu who prophesied saying : 
' In the hour that a monkey overcomes thee by force, the titans 
will cease to be invincible.' 
" That time, fixed by Swyambhu has come, as is shown by 
thy presence here to-day ! The truth ordained by the Self create is unalterable. The destruction of the unrighteous King 
Ravana together with all the titans is imminent, in consequence 
of the abduction of Sita. Therefore, O Best of Monkeys, do 
thou enter this city, which is protected by Ravana, and accom plish all thou desirest. Entering this splendid city, protected by 
the Lord of the Titans, which is doomed, go about freely where soever thou wilt, in search of the chaste daughter of Janaka." 
344 
SUNDARA KANDA 
CHAPTER 4 
Hanuman observes the City and its Inhabitants 
By his valour, the mighty Hanuman, foremost of monkeys, 
having triumphed over Lanka, that splendid city, able to change 
her form at will, without passing through the gate, leapt over the 
wall and, by night, penetrated into the centre of the capital. 
Hanuman, faithful to the interests of the King of the Monkeys, 
having found his way into that city, thus placed his left foot on 
the heads of his foes ;' and that excellent son of Maruta, 
entering by night, proceeded along the royal highway strewn 
with flowers and continued to advance through that enchanting 
capital where the sound of musical instruments blended with 
laughter. 
That magnificent city with its innumerable dwellings bearing 
the mark of the mace and the goad, with windows of diamond, 
resembled the sky adorned with clouds. Lanka belonging to 
the titans, with its opulent mansions like white clouds, adorned 
with lotuses and swastikas, hung with garlands, highly decorated, 
was viewed by Hanuman with delight, who ranged it on Rama's 
behalf and in the interests of Sugriva. 
That illustrious monkey passing from house to house, 
observed the many dwellings of varying forms, on every side and 
listened to the melodious chanting in triple modulation, of women 
sick with love, who resembled celestial nymphs. He heard the 
tinkling of their girdles and the clashing of their anklets, as 
they ascended the stairways of those dwellings belonging to the 
great Ones, and here and there the sound of clapping of hands 
and the clicking of castanets. He heard also the intoning of 
sacred formulas in the dwellings of the titans and the recitation 
of those occupied in the study of the Veda. 
He also saw titans who were singing the praises of Ravana in a 
loud voice, a great company of them being stationed on the 
royal highway which they obstructed ; and he observed a large 
1 Placed his left foot . . . implying that he thereby initiated the defeat 
of the titans. 
345 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
concourse of spies in the central courtyard, who had been 
initiated, some with matted locks, some shaven, some wearing 
deerskins and some stark naked, bearing handfuls of darbha 
grass, braziers, picks, clubs and staves, and others in rags, who 
had only a single eye or ear or breast which twitched ; and some 
were dwarfs, hideous to behold ; and there were bowmen, 
swordsmen and warriors bearing clubs and iron bars or efful gent in curious armour ; some were neither exceedingly fat nor 
too lean nor unduly tall nor short nor extremely fair nor dark 
nor humpbacked nor dwarfed ; some were deformed, some 
handsome, some distinguished and there were also standard 
bearers and some who carried flags and every kind of weapon. 
And Hanuman observed that some were armed with spears, 
darts, harpoons, arrows, slings and other weapons and many 
ranging about at will wore garlands and were daubed with 
paste, sprinkled with perfume, clothed in rich stuffs and 
adorned with magnificent jewels ; some of these mighty warriors 
were furnished with javelins and maces and hundreds and 
thousands of them were garrisoned in the central courtyard, 
engaged in guarding the private apartments with vigilance by 
order of their king. 
And he saw the famous palace of the Lord of the Titans, 
built on the summit of the mountain, with golden arched gate ways, surrounded by a moat, embellished with pale lotuses and 
completely encircled by a rampart, resembling heaven itself; 
and it was marvellous, resonant with pleasant sounds and filled 
with the neighing of superb steeds and well-bred beasts and 
the noise of chariots and elephants; and there were four tusked 
elephants resembling great clouds and many herds of deer. 
Then the monkey entered that palace protected by the Titan 
King, guarded by thousands of mighty Yatudhanas, the portals 
of which were richly decorated with beasts and birds and he 
penetrated to the inner apartment encircled with walls of 
Hema and Jambunada gold, its ceilings adorned with pearls 
and gems of great price and pervaded by the fragrance of aloe 
and sandalwood. 
346 
SUNDARA KANDA 
CHAPTER 5 
Hanuman ranges the City without finding Sita 
Then the fortunate Hanuman beheld that brilliant orb of the 
night in the midst of the stars covering all beings with its light, 
like a bull inflamed with desire in the midst of a herd of cows, 
and that heroic monkey gazed on that moon, floating in the sky, 
white as the sheen of a conch or a lotus stalk, that star of cool ing rays which destroys the sorrows of the world, draws up the 
tides and sheds its light on all beings. That brightness 
which shines on the summit of Mount Mandara and at dusk 
sparkles on the sea, as well as on the lotuses of the lakes, now 
blazed from the face of that nocturnal planet. 
Like a swan on its silvery nest or a lion in a cave of the Mandara 
Mountain or a warrior on a proud elephant so was the splendour 
of the moon in the heavens. Like a humpbacked buffalo with 
pointed horns or the lofty Mountain Shveta with its high peaks 
or an elephant with gold-encircled tusks, so did the moon appear 
with its clearly defined prominence. 
Just as the great orb of the sun dissolves the ice and frost on 
muddy pools so was darkness dispelled by the brilliance of the 
auspicious moon, whose symbol is the hare, so that even the dark 
patches on its surface appeared bright. Like the King of 
Beasts issuing from his cave or the lord of elephants entering the 
deep woods or a sovereign of men ranging his dominions so did 
the moon appear in its full splendour. 
The brightness of its rising had dispelled the night, accentuat ing the swarthiness of the titans, those eaters of flesh, and 
awakening thoughts of love in the lover. 
Women, whose melodious voices had charmed the ear, having 
disported themselves, now slept in the arms of their lords, 
whilst titans of strange and terrible deeds went forth marauding. 
And the sagacious Hanuman beheld mansions where intoxica tion and folly reigned, where chariots, horses and golden seats 
were seen everywhere in luxurious and warlike abundance . 
He beheld titans in violent debate, raising their great arms, 
discoursing wildly, railing at each other and exchanging 
347 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
acrimonious words ; and some were striking their breasts and 
brandishing great bows, whilst others adjusted their attire or 
embraced their consorts. 
And Hanuman observed courtesans performing their toilet, 
whilst others slept and incomparably lovely women laughing 
or frowning in anger. Here gigantic elephants trumpeted, 
there worship was being performed, whilst warriors were utter ing threats, so that the city resembled a lake filled with angry 
serpents. 
And he beheld in that place, persons full of intelligence, able 
debators, pious men, leaders of fashion and observers of ritual, 
and beholding those magnificent beings, endowed with every 
attribute in accord with their nature, Hanuman was delighted ; 
such was their splendour, that even those who were ugly, 
appeared fair. 
And he saw their consorts, full of nobility and of great beauty, 
worthy of adornment, like unto stars in the excellence of their 
conduct, who were filled with affection for their protectors, 
some casting tender glances, others exchanging tokens and some 
drinking. 
And by night, Hanuman observed lovely women being em braced by their paramours, affecting modesty or passion, like 
birds sporting with their mates, whilst others, in their homes, 
lay peacefully on the breasts of their lords, full of tenderness, 
and faithful to their conjugal duty. 
Some, lying without raiment, deserted by their lovers, had 
the radiance of gold and were marvellously beautiful with their 
golden skins, graceful limbs and complexions like the moonlight. 
And Hanuman saw other women in their homes experiencing 
the height of joy with their lords, full of delight, decked with 
flowers, charming the hearts of their consorts with their beauty. 
These lovely women of radiant countenance, resembling the 
moon, possessing marvellous eyes with sweeping lashes and slant ing lids and adorned with innumerable jewels, seemed to 
Hanuman to resemble flashes of lightning. 
But of the nobly-born Sita, offspring of a royal House, fixed 
in the path of virtue, resembling a delicate flowering creeper or 
the frail Sadhujata plant, sprung from the mind of Brahma 
Himself, he could find no trace. Sita, established in the path 
34» 
SUNDARA KANDA 
of chastity, her gaze ever fixed on Rama, ever absorbed in his 
contemplation, his very mind and heart itself, exalted above all 
women, a prey to burning grief, her bosom wet with tears, 
she who was formerly adorned with priceless ornaments, Sita 
with her charming lashes and enchanting throat, resembling a 
blue-necked peahen disporting itself in the woods, or the blurred 
outline of the moon or a golden ingot covered with dust or a 
scar left by a wound or a golden arrow snapped by the wind. 
And that monkey, after his long search, not finding Sita, 
consort of that lord of men, Rama, the foremost of those skilled 
in speech, was overcome with grief and bereft of all courage. 
CHAPTER 6 
Hanuman explores Ravana's Palace 
Wandering here and there at will on the roofs of the houses, 
that monkey, able to assume any form he chose, ranged the city 
of Lanka, and that auspicious one came to the abode of that 
Lord of the Titans, encircled by a shining wall, sparkling like the 
sun and guarded by terrible demons, as is a mighty forest by 
lions. 
And that foremost of monkeys beheld that marvellous palace 
with its fretted archways, inlaid with silver and embellished with 
gold, abounding in splendid courts and gateways, filled with the 
drivers of elephants and indomitable warriors, irresistibly 
swift horses harnessed to chariots and curious waggons, covered 
with lion and tiger skins, that were embossed with images of 
gold and silver and hung with jingling bells. 
Strewn with precious stones and furnished with rich seats, 
this was the favourite haunt of the Maharathas and their meeting 
place. Rare deer and birds of every species and variety abounded 
here, whilst disciplined sentries protected it. Everywhere 
noble and distinguished women could be seen and the palace 
was filled with the tinkling of their ornaments ; there the fore most of the titans dwelt and it was decorated with royal symbols 
and fragrant with sandalwood. Crowded with great beings, like 
a forest filled with lions, resounding to the bearing of gongs, 
349 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
tambourines and the blare of conches, it was also the place of 
worship of the titans, where offerings were made at the times of 
the moon's change ; sometimes, in fear of Ravana, silent as the 
sea and sometimes resounding like the waves, that vast abode 
belonging to the mighty Ravana was strewn with precious gems, 
and that great monkey beheld it blazing in. splendour and filled 
with elephants, horses and chariots. 
' It is the jewel of Lanka ' reflected that illustrious monkey, 
Hanuman, wandering about the outskirts of the palace and he 
began to range the dwellings of the titans and their gardens, 
and he bounded into the abode of Prahasta and then plunged 
courageously into the palace of Mahaparshwa ; thereafter, that 
mighty monkey entered the residence of Kumbhakarna which 
resembled a mass of cloud's and also that of Bibishana ; then 
in turn he visited the dwellings of Mahodara, Virupaksha, 
Vidyujjibha and Vidyunmala and with a bound he entered the 
house of Vahudanshtra and that of Suka and the intelligent 
Sarana. Then the mansions of Indrajit, Jambumala and Sumala 
were explored by that foremost of monkeys and thereafter he 
passed on to the abodes of Rashmiketu, Suryasachu and Vajra kaya ; and next the offspring of the Wind-god searched the 
habitations of Dhumraksha, Sampati, the grim Vidyudruna, 
Phana, Vighana and Sukanabha, Shakra, Shatha, Kapatha, 
Hrasvakarna, Danshtra and the demon Lomasa, Yudhyonmatta, 
Matta and the horseman, Dhwajagriva, Sadin, Vidyujjibha and 
Vijibha, as also that of Hastimukha and of Karala, Vishala and 
Sonitaksha. The illustrious Son of Maruta then searched the 
dwellings of other prosperous titans one after the other, marking 
their affluence. 
And having searched all the residences belonging to those 
titans in every way, that fortunate monkey approached the palace 
of the king. Then the foremost of monkeys observed demon 
women of menacing looks, prowling outside the apartments 
where Ravana slept, bearing darts and maces in their hands and 
equipped with spears and clubs and he beheld innumerable 
bands of them in the abode of the titan king and gigantic 
demons brandishing weapons of every kind. He beheld steeds 
of exceeding swiftness, red, white and black and wonderfully 
bred elephants, vanquishers of hostile tuskers, trained for every 
350 
SUNDARA KANDA 
suitable purpose and equal to Airavata himself in conflict and 
these elephants, the destroyers of hostile armies resembled 
scurrying clouds or moving hills and their trumpeting was like 
the crash of thunder. 
Then that monkey, the son of the Wind-god, beheld thousands 
of the titan host in that palace and cars of gold and glittering 
mail which shone like the rising sun ; he saw also many litters 
of different shapes, and bowers, picture galleries, gymnasiums, 
mountains constructed of wood, pavilions and entertainment 
halls. And in that palace belonging to Ravana, was a charm ing edifice as beautiful as the Mandara Mountain and pens for 
peacocks and banners and flagpoles. Heaps of jewels lay about 
and a great accumulation of treasure had been brought there by 
the exploits of those valiant titans so that it resembled the palace 
of Kuvera. On account of the lustre of those gems and the 
resplendence of Ravana himself, that palace glittered like the sun 
with its myriad rays. 
And that monkey chief beheld couches and seats of gold, and 
vessels wrought with pearls overflowing with wines.1 and the 
dimensions and magnificence of that place caused it to resemble 
the mansion of Kama or the abode of Kuvera, and that palace 
resounded with the tinkling of anklets and girdles, with drums 
and cymbals and other musical instruments and was thronged 
with women as lovely as pearls and surrounded by great 
ramparts. 
chapter 7 
Description of the Aerial Chariot Pushpaka 
Then that mighty monkey continued to explore those dwellings 
fitted with golden windows, studded with emeralds, resembling 
a mass of clouds in the rainy season rent by Ughtning and tra versed by flocks of cranes. And he beheld various halls and 
1 Overflowing with Wines — Lit. : Madha and Asava— spiritous liquor* 
made of honey, molasses or the blossom of Bassia Caryola, or according to 
some, grapes. 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
buildings stored with conches, bows and weapons of war, 
furnished with turrets as high as hills, and these mansions, con taining treasure of every kind were held in regard by both Gods 
and titans and were flawless and constructed by Havana by his 
own power. 
Hanuman having scoured the mansions of that Lord of Lanka 
meticulously furnished with every comfort as if Maya had 
created them, thereafter visited the palace of that King of 
Rakshasas himself, which surpassed all others and resembled a 
mass of towering clouds. Of incomparable loveliness, it seemed 
as if heaven itself had descended on earth and its beauty was 
dazzling. Teeming with innumerable gems, trees of every kind 
covered it with flowers like the summit of a mountain on which 
snow has fallen ; beautiful women served as its ornaments and 
it shone like a cloud riven by lightning ; such was its splendour 
that it resembled a marvellous chariot drawn through the skies 
by ravishing swans. 
Like the peak of a mountain rich in ore or the firmament 
adorned by the moon and stars or like clouds of many hues, 
it glistened with innumerable gems. Artificial rocks made of 
clay, resembling mountain ranges, planted with counterfeit 
trees laden with heaps of flowers, fashioned with stamens and 
leaves could be seen there and improvised dwellings, dazzlingly 
white, with pools covered with flowering lotuses possessing 
golden stamens, and diverse groves and ravishing fountains. 
The monkey gazed on the vast aerial chariot named Pushpaka, 
which, gleaming like pearl, planed above the highest buildings 
and contained birds made of emerald, silver and coral and 
serpents marvellously fashioned of various metals and life-sized 
horses and birds with charming beaks and wonderful wings 
which contracted and expanded, their plumage like that of 
Kama himself, posed on gold and coral flowers ; and there were 
elephants with tapering trunks, bearing lotus leaves, engaged in 
showering water on the Goddess* Lakshmi, who, seated in a pool, 
held lotuses in her fair hands. 
Such was the marvellous creation which met the astonished 
monkey's gaze, which resembled a mountain of charming caverns 
or a tree from whose hollows delicious fragrance escapes in the 
springtime. 
353 
SUNDARA KANDA 
Yet that monkey searching that exalted city, protected by the 
ten-headed Ravana, was unable to find the daughter of Janaka, 
so highly regarded and deeply afflicted and who had been con quered by the virtue and valour of her lord. And not finding 
Janaka's daughter, despite his investigations and the vigilance 
of his search, the illustrious Hanuman, who was virtuous and 
generous of soul, felt a burning anguish take possession of his 
heart. 
chapter 8 
A further Description of the Aerial Chariot Pushpaka 
Halting there, the intelligent monkey, born of Pavana, regarded 
that splendid chariot encrusted with gold and gems more care fully. Fashioned of plated gold, embellished with lovely images, 
regarded by Vishwakarma himself as an incomparable artistic 
achievement, travelling in space like a guiding light in the orbit 
of the sun, it was immeasurably resplendent. No detail of 
that car had been executed unskilfully, no ornament but appeared 
to be a jewel of great price nor was there anything surpassed by 
the chariots of the Gods, every part being excellently wrought. 
By the merit of his asceticism and contemplation Ravana 
had obtained it and it repaired wheresoever its master directed 
it by the power of his thought. Irresistible and swift as the 
wind, a source of happiness to those magnanimous beings 
given to pious deeds, who had reached the peak of prosperity 
and glory, capable of ranging the firmament, containing many 
apartments and furnished with innumerable works of art, 
captivating to the mind, stainless as the autumnal moon, re sembling a mountain with splendid peaks, borne by thousands 
of demons whose cheeks were graced with earrings, voracious 
eaters, of large unwinking eyes, who travelled through space 
with exceeding velocity day and night, that aerial chariot, 
Pushpaka, splendid to look upon, covered with flowers, fairer 
than spring itself, drew the gaze of that Prince of Monkey 
Warriors. 
353 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 9 
Hanmnan searches the Harem 
Within these precincts, a magnificent building, remarkable 
for its spaciousness and splendour, arrested the attention of 
Hanuman, the son of Maruta ; it was two miles in width, 
four in length and belonged to the King of the Titans himself. 
And Hanuman, the slayer of his foes, ranging here and there 
in search of the Princess of Videha, the large-eyed Sita, beheld 
that goodly residence where the titans dwelt together and he 
approached the palace of the king, surrounded by three and 
four tusked elephants and guarded in its entire length by 
warriors bearing weapons in their hands. He beheld that 
dwelling, thronged with titan women, consorts of Havana, 
and also the daughters of kings who had been forcibly carried 
away by him, which resembled an ocean teeming with crocodiles, 
sharks, whales, enormous fish and serpents, agitated by the 
force of the tempest. And the splendour of the abode of Vaish ravana, Chandra and Harivahana was reflected in Havana's 
palace, a splendour that was unequalled and changeless and 
the prosperity of the residences of Kuvera, Yama and Varuna 
were rivalled, nay surpassed, by that of the titan's abode. 
In the centre of that palace, the offspring of the wind, saw 
yet another edifice, well constructed and furnished with in numerable grilles. Formerly created in heaven at Brahma's 
wish by Vishwakarma, that noble car embellished with gems 
was called Pushpaka, which Kuvera had acquired by pro longed austerities and of which the King of the Titans, having 
vanquished him by his might, took possession. And that 
mighty monkey ascended that splendid car, containing figures 
of wolves made of Kartasvara and Hiranya gold and adorned 
with slender pillars of dazzling splendour, furnished with 
private rooms and gleaming pavilions, resembling the Meru 
and Mandara Mountains, licking the skies and blazing like the 
354 
SUNDARA KANDA 
This masterpiece of Vishwakarma had many golden stairways 
and a superb and marvellous ceiling; it contained balconies 
and galleries of deep blue sapphire and other precious gems ; 
the floors were encrusted with rare pearls which rendered it 
blindingly beautiful ; built of red sandalwood and shining 
like pure gold, it resembled the rising sun and subtle perfumes 
rose therefrom. 
That mighty monkey, stationed there, smelt the rich odour 
of wines and viands which rose on every side, and those 
ambrosial and penetrating fumes seemed to him to be the 
embodiment of Anila herself and were inhaled by him as 
coming from an intimate friend, and that aroma seemed to 
say to Hanuman " Come hither where Ravana is to be found ", 
and he proceeded further and beheld a vast and glorious hall. 
Now that spacious apartment was very dear to Ravana, 
who looked on it as a greatly cherished woman and its jewelled 
stairways and galleries of pure gold gave it a dazzling appear ance, the floors being of crystal with inlay of ivory, pearl, 
diamond, coral, silver and gold. It was adorned with many 
jewelled pilasters, which were symetrical, straight, elegant and 
inlaid with exceeding artistry and it was supported by tall 
pillars of equal size resembling wings so that the building 
seemed to be flying in the air and the floor was covered by 
a carpet, wide and four-cornered like the earth1 and patterned 
as with varied countries* kingdoms and dwellings, and there 
the song of birds could be heard and it was pervaded by a 
celestial fragrance. 
Hung with rich tapestries, darkened by incense fumes, 
spotless and pure as a swan, garlanded with leaves and flowers 
lending it the resemblance of Kamadhenu, bringing delight to 
the heart, colour to the cheek, giving birth to prosperity and 
banishing all sorrow, the apartments of the King of the Titans 
gratified every sense, as if it were a mother. 
Entering that abode protected by Ravana, Hanuman 
asked himself: " Can this be paradise or the region of the 
Gods or Indra's capital or the state of supreme bliss ? " 
and he examined the golden lamps, which resembled gamblers 
1 Four-Cornered — The ancient Hindu belief was that the earth was four cornered. 
355 2a 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
absorbed in their dice, who, defeated by their opponents, are 
plunged in thought, and Hanuman perceived that the brilli ance of the lamps and the lustre of Ravana and the splendour 
of the decorations, illumined the appartment. 
He beheld innumerable women, lying on the rugs, attired 
in every kind of raiment with wreaths on their heads, who, 
under the influence of wine, had fallen asleep, having ceased 
to disport themselves, half the night being spent. And, on 
account of the silence, that great company, decked with orna ments, the tinkling of which was no longer audible, resembled 
a vast lake filled with lotuses where the sound of the swans 
and the humming of bees has ceased. 
Maruti gazed on the faces of those lovely women with eyes 
and mouths shut fast, emitting a flower-like fragrance and they 
resembled lotuses that, folding their petals at evening, wait 
for the dawn to open them once more or like water lilies 
which the bees, intoxicated with love, visit continually. With 
just cause did that noble and mighty monkey compare rhem to 
nymphoeae, for the harem was bright with their radiance, as 
the starry heavens on a serene autumnal night and, in their 
midst, the King of the Titans blazed like a fair moon, encircled 
by attendant stars. 
Then that monkey said to himself : " Those planets that 
have fallen from the firmament, their merit exhausted, are all 
re-united here ", and in sooth, those women in their grace, 
beauty and magnificence shone like dazzling meteors. 
Some lay wrapped in slumber into which they had fallen in 
the midst of dancing and feasting, their hair and crowns in 
disarray, their ornaments scattered here and there; others 
amongst those lovely beings had lost their anklets and the 
tilaka mark on their foreheads had been effaced ; some had 
allowed their garlands to fall aside, some had broken their 
pearls and, their raiment in disorder, their girdles loosened, 
resembled disburdened mules, whilst others, bereft of ear rings, their garlands torn and crushed, looked like flowering 
creepers trodden under foot by great elephants in the forest. 
Sometimes the loosened pearls, like the scintillating rays of 
the moon, lay between the women's breasts like sleeping swans, 
whilst chains of emerald resembled drakes or those of gold 
356 
SUNDARA KANDA 
looked like Chakravata birds. And those women were like 
unto rivers, their thighs being the banks, where swans, geese 
and other waterfowl disport themselves or, sleeping, resembled 
streams, the golden bells on their girdles, the ripples, their 
faces, the lotuses, their amorous desires, the crocodiles, their 
grace, the banks. 
On their tender limbs the marks of the ornaments looked 
like bees, whilst the veils of others, rising and falling with their 
breath, fluttered gracefully before their faces like bright streamers 
of many-coloured yarn and the earrings of others vibrated 
gently with the circulating air. 
Their subtly perfumed breath impregnated with the aroma of 
sugar-sweetened wines which they had drunk, caused Ravana 
delight and, some of his consorts, in dream, savoured the lips 
of their rivals again and again, deeming them to be the king's. 
Passionately devoted to their lord, these lovely women, no 
longer mistresses of themselves, offered their companions 
marks of their affection. Some, in their rich attire, slept 
leaning on their arms laden with bracelets, some rested on 
their companions' breasts, some on their laps, their bosoms, 
their thighs and backs, and under the influence of wine, cling ing amorously to one another, those women of slender waist, 
slept, their arms intertwined. 
Those groups of damsels enfolding one another, resembled 
a garland of flowers visited by amorous bees or, like creepers 
opening to the caress of the vernal breeze that intertwine, 
forming clusters of blossom or the interlocking branches of 
great forest trees full of swarming bees ; thus seemed this 
gathering of Ravana's consorts. And on account of the 
proximity of these women, sleeping close to one another, it 
was impossible to distinguish to whom the jewels, veils and 
garlands covering their limbs, belonged. 
While Ravana slept, the beauty of those women resembling 
golden lamps, seemed to watch over him and there were 
daughters of Rajarishis, Giants and Celestial Beings, who had 
become his consorts and that war-like titan king had acquired 
them after subduing their relatives, though some had followed 
him of their own accord from love. None had been forcibly 
borne away who had not been attracted by his prowess and 
357 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
qualities and none had belonged to another, save the daughter 
of Janaka whose heart was set on Rama ; none was devoid 
of nobility, beauty, intelligence and grace and each was the 
object of Havana's desire. 
Then the lord of the monkeys, endowed with virtue, reflected: 
" If the consort of Raghava were as one of these women, the 
King of the Titans wou!d indeed be blessed to-day, but Sita 
is far superior to them on account of her great qualities, which 
is evident, since for her sake that mighty monarch of Lanka 
has committed this wicked deed. 
CHAPTER 10 
Hanuman sees Havana surrounded by his Wives 
Looking round, Hanuman observed a splendid dais, worthy 
of the Gods, made of crystal encrusted with pearls, furnished 
with couches of emerald mounted on ivory and gold and 
covered with rich and priceless rugs. And he saw a white 
canopy, in that place, festooned with celestial garlands that 
gleamed like the moon. 
And he observed a magnificent couch inlaid with gold, 
flaming like fire and bearing garlands of Ashoka flowers, 
around which figures were waving fans to and fro, creating 
cooling draughts and perfumes of every kind wreathed it with 
delicious fragrance. Spread with soft woollen cloths and 
decked with chaplets of flowers, it was adorned on every side. 
And there, resembling a thundercloud, the Sovereign of the 
Titans lay with bright and flashing earrings, reddened eyes, 
golden raiment, his limbs smeared with saffron and fragrant 
sandal, like a purple cloud at dusk, riven with lightning. Adorned 
with celestial ornaments, magnificent to behold, able to change 
his form at will, as he lay asleep he resembled the Mandara 
Mountain with its trees, groves and bushes without number. 
Having ceased from dalliance, decked with priceless ornaments, 
the delight of the titans and dear to all the titan women, his 
feasting over he lay sleeping on the golden bed, breathing 
like a serpent. 
358 
SUNDARA KANDA 
And Hanuman, filled with awe, shrank back in fear, and 
stationed himself on a landing of the stairway, pressing himself 
against the inner wall; then that courageous monkey looked 
down on that lion among titans lying there in a drunken stupor. 
And as the King of the Titans lay sleeping, his luxurious 
couch resembled a great waterfall by which a mighty tusker 
in mustha is resting. 
Hanuman looked down on the two outstretched arms, 
encircled with golden bracelets of that gigantic monarch, 
resembling the standards of Indra, which had formerly been 
pierced in combat by the sharp tusks of Airavata and torn by 
the discus of Vishnu and the great shoulders that had been 
lacerated by India's mace. Those vast arms, firmly set with 
well-formed, powerful muscles and thumbs and nails bearing 
auspicious marks, rings coverings the fingers, those arms, 
thick as clubs, rounded like the trunk of an elephant, that 
lay along the opulent couch as it were two snakes with five 
heads, smeared with sandal of the colour of hare's blood, 
fresh, extremely rare and of a delicious fragrance massaged by 
women of sovereign beauty with precious unguents, those 
arms that had caused Yakshas, Pannagas, Gandharvas Devas 
and Danavas to cry out in terror, that monkey gazed upon 
as they lay along the couch, like two great and angry reptiles 
sleeping in a cave on the Mandara Mountain. And with his 
two great arms, the Chief of the Titans resembled Mount 
Mandara with its twin peaks. 
The scent of the Mango or Punnaga tree, impregnated with 
that of the Bakula blended with the savour of viands and the 
aroma of wine, issued from the vast mouth of that Monarch 
of Titans during sleep and seemed to fill the whole apartment. 
His diadem was decorated with rubies and precious stones, 
gleaming with gold and he was adorned with earrings, smeared 
with red sandal, his well-developed chest bearing a string of 
pearls ; a white silken cloth, flung aside, revealed his scars 
and he was covered with a costly yellow coverlet. Like a 
mass of light he lay, hissing like a serpent so that it seemed 
as if an elephant lay asleep in the deep waters of the Ganges. 
Four lamps, set on golden pillars, cast their light to the four 
sides as lightning reveals the surface of a mass of cloud. 
359 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Then that foremost of monkeys saw the wives of that great 
monarch of the titans sleeping at the foot of their lord, their 
faces bright as the moon, wearing precious earrings and fresh 
garlands. Skilled musicians and dancers, they lay in the arms 
and on the breast of that Indra of Titans, attired in beautiful 
raiment, and the monkey gazed on those women wearing 
golden bracelets and earrings set with diamonds and emeralds, 
their faces fair as the moon, illumined by the reflection of 
their glittering earrings, lighting the hall as stars illumine the 
firmament. 
Overcome with drinking and amorous dalliance, those slender waisted wives of the King of the Demons lay fast asleep where 
they had been seated ; and one, possessed of lovely limbs, 
skilled in the dance, slept there, wearied by her graceful motions, 
whilst another, embracing her Vina, looked like a lotus that had 
fallen into the water clinging to a passing raft ; a third dark eyed maiden held her Mankuka in her lap, as a youthful woman 
would her child, while yet another with graceful limbs and 
shapely bosom, slept with her tambourine pressed to her heart, 
as one embraces his love after a long absence. This one, 
with eyes like lotuses had fallen asleep clasping her Vina, as a 
beautiful girl enfolds her beloved one affectionately in her arms. 
Here one of restrained sense lay beside her lute which she 
encircled with her arms, resembling one affianced lying by 
the side of her chosen one ; there, one whose limbs gleamed like 
Kanada gold, dimpled, ravishing, her eyes heavy with wine, 
though sleeping, was striking her drum. One of slender waist 
and flawless beauty, worn out by feasting, slept with a cymbal 
in her lap and yet another held a Dindima and had another 
slung on her back so that she looked like a young mother 
with her husband and her child. One, with eyes large as lotus 
petals, clasping her Adambara tightly to her breast, had fallen 
asleep under the influence of wine and yet another, her water 
vessel overturned, resembled a flowery wreath that is sprinkled 
with water to keep it green ; another, falling under the sway 
of sleep, with her hands covered her breasts resembling two 
golden cups, and one, with eyes like lotuses, fair as the moon, 
had fallen asleep embracing one of her companions possessed 
of lovely nips. Peerlessly beautiful women, clasping musical 
360 
s;un;dara kanda 
instruments, pressed them to their bosoms like lovers their 
chosen ones. 
And that monkey beheld a marvellous bed set apart, on 
which one of these lovely women lay, richly attired, adorned 
with pearls and precious gems, who seemed to lend radiance 
to that magnificent apartment. Clad in silk bright as Kanaka 
gold, Havana's favourite Queen, Mandodari by name, that 
slender-waisted woman of gracious features, lay fast asleep, 
adorned with ornaments and, seeing her, that offspring of the 
Wind -God said to himself : " This one, endowed with the 
wealth of youth and beauty may be Sita " and he rejoiced 
exceedingly. Thereafter, in his delight, he leapt into the air, 
waving his tail and manifesting his joy by his antics, frolicking, 
singing, climbing up the pillars from whence he dropped 
to the ground, thus demonstrating his monkey nature. 
CHAPTER II 
Description of the Banqueting Hall 
Then that mighty monkey dismissed this thought concerning 
Sita and began to reflect further : 
" Separated from Rama, that lovely woman would be unable 
to sleep, eat or adorn herself nor would she submit to any 
other, were he King of the Celestials himself, for Rama has 
no equal even among the Gods ; this is therefore some other." 
In this conviction, that foremost of monkeys began to search 
the banqueting hall anew, anxious to discover Sita. 
Leaning on their tambourines, drums and Celikas, or 
stretched on luxurious couches, all these women slept soundly, 
worn out with playing, singing, dancing and drinking. And 
that leader of monkeys saw thousands of women beautifully 
adorned, some having fallen asleep discussing each other's 
charms, some debating the art of singing, some skilled in dis cerning time and place, discoursing on circumstance, some 
given over to merriment and, elsewhere also, he observed 
beautiful and youthful women who had fallen asleep talking of 
36i 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
beauty, or, full of perspicacity, deciding what was opportune. 
And in their midst, the Lord of the Titans, resembled a bull 
in a spacious stall, surrounded by graceful kine. Encircled 
by those women, that King of the Titans looked like a mighty 
tusker accompanied by female elephants in the forest. 
In the abode of that powerful Titan King, that lion among 
monkeys searched the banqueting hall throughout, furnished 
with every desirable object and he beheld the flesh of buffalo, 
deer and bear in separate dishes together with peacock and 
fowl on golden platters, that had not been broached, and 
percupine, deer and peacocks, seasoned with curds and sochal 
salt and goats, leverets and fish half consumed, with portions 
of dressed venison and sauces. There were wines of superior 
vintage and rare dishes with salted pies spiced with vinegar 
and diverse confections capable of stimulating the appetite. 
Costly bracelets and anklets were scattered here and there 
and fruit was arranged in small dishes, whilst flowers were 
spread about, lending the whole floor an air of splendour, and 
elegant couches and seats set round that place of feasting 
caused it to shine like fire. In addition, meats of every kind 
and flavour, seasoned with diverse substances and dressed by 
skilful cooks, were placed round the hall and Hanuman ob served delicious beverages made of a variety of ingredients, 
some from sugar, some distilled from fruit and flowers or 
impregnated with fragrant powders. 
The vast floor reflected the innumerable garlands, golden 
vessels, crystal bowls and cups lying everywhere and looked 
exceedingly beautiful and that mighty monkey saw golden 
wine jars studded with gems, some of which were full of wine, 
some half full and some wholly drained ; and there were many 
wines that had not yet been served and various kinds of viands 
that remained untouched. 
Elsewhere he saw many couches that were unoccupied, and 
some, where women of unsurpassed beauty slept, clasping each 
other in their arms. One of these youthful women had forcibly 
possessed herself of another's quilt and, wrapping herself 
therein, had fallen asleep. The gentle breathing of these 
women barely stirred their attire or the garlands that adorned 
them but caressed them as it were and a gentle breeze, laden 
362 
SUNDARA KANDA 
with the odour of sandal and the sweet-tasting Sidhu, with 
the diverse floral wreaths and flowers, perfumed bark pre pared for ablutions and incense, spread over the aerial car, 
Pushpaka. 
And in that residence of the titan there were women of 
incomparable beauty, some dark-skinned, some the colour of 
Kancana gold, who, overcome by slumber and worn out with 
dalliance, resembled sleeping lotuses. 
Thus that mighty monkey searched every quarter of Havana's 
private apartments without seeing Janaki anywhere and, 
having scanned the faces of all these women, he was filled with 
apprehension, fearing lest he had failed in his purpose. Then 
he reflected : " Beholding the wife of another while she is 
sleeping, is undoubtedly an infringement of the moral law, 
verily to look on another's wife was never my intention but 
here I have seen one who hath lusted after the wives of others." 
Then another thought came to that sagacious monkey, 
single-mindedly bent on the execution of his duty : "All 
these consorts of Ravana have been beheld by me without 
their knowledge yet I find no fluctuation in the tenor of my mind. 
The mind is the motive power of every movement of the 
senses, whether it be good or evil and mine remains untroubled ; 
further, how could I search for Sita otherwise ? It is amongst 
women that one should look for women ; every being is to be 
sought amongst its own kind, none searches for a woman among 
deer. Therefore with a pure heart I have explored Ravana's 
inner apartment but I have not seen the daughter of Janaka." 
And Hanuman scrutinized the faces of the daughters of 
Devas, Danavas and Nagas, without finding Sita and, not 
finding her in that place, he left the banqueting hall and 
began to search elsewhere. Leaving that place of feasting, the 
offspring of the Wind-god began to look for Sita in another 
quarter. 
#1 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 12 
Hanuman becomes despondent 
Remaining in the precincts of the palace, Hanuman searched 
the arbours, galleries and the sleeping apartments, eager to 
discover Sita but without being able to find that lady of 
gracious appearance there ; and, not finding the beloved of that 
descendant of Raghu, the mighty monkey reflected : — 
" Since, despite mine exertions I am unable to find the 
daughter of Mithila, assuredly Sita is no longer alive. That 
youthful and virtuous woman, anxious to defend her honour, 
has been slain by the wicked Lord of the Titans for remaining 
faithful to her conjugal duty or the daughter of King Janaka 
has died of fright on seeing those consorts of the Sovereign 
of the Titans, who are deformed, sallow-skinned, misshapen 
and who possess huge heads and monstrous forms. Failing 
to discover Sita, my valour has been expended in vain and a 
large part of the term allotted to the monkeys has run out; 
I dare not present myself before Sugriva, who is powerful and 
given to meting out harsh punishment. I have explored the 
inner apartments thoroughly but the gentle Sita was not to be 
found there and I have spent myself in vain. Further, on 
my return, the assembled monkeys will enquire of me saying : 
" O Valiant Hanuman, having reached the further shore, what 
didst thou accomplish there, tell us ? " 
Not having seen Janaka's daughter, what shall I answer? 
The term fixed having passed, assuredly it is meet that I should 
fast to death, and what will the aged Jambavan and Angada 
say with all the assembled monkeys since I have crossed the 
ocean to no purpose ? Yet perseverance is the root of success, 
perseverance is the root of prosperity, perseverance brings 
supreme felicity, therefore I will search all those places still 
left unexplored by me. Moreover it is my intention to put 
forth fresh efforts and investigate all those regions not yet 
visited by me and the banqueting halls, the gardens, the sports 
pavilions, the courtyards, dwellings, highways, alleys and 
364 
SUNDARA KANDA 
chariots, though already searched by me, shall be examined 
once again. 
Having thus resolved, Hanuman set about exploring the 
basements, temples and many-storied dwellings, going up and 
down, to and fro, opening doors and closing others, entering 
here and making an exit there, till there was not even the 
space of four fingers left unscrutinized by him. And he 
visited the galleries running inside the ramparts and terraces 
supported by stanchions and the groves and lotus pools and 
he saw there hideous and monstrous female titans of every 
shape but not the daughter of Janaka ; and the illustrious 
consorts of Vidyadharas fell under his gaze but not the beloved 
of Raghava. 
Hanuman beheld there also the daughters of Nagas, of lovely 
limbs, whose faces shone like the full moon, who had been 
forcibly brought there by the Lord of the Titans, but not the 
cherished daughter of Janaka and, not seeing her among all 
those lovely women, a profound despair seized that warrior 
born of Maruta. 
Reflecting that the exertions of all those leaders of monkeys 
and the crossing of the ocean had proved vain, the son of Anila 
became extremely anxious and descended from that aerial car. 
Thereafter Hanuman, born of Maruta, grew pensive and a 
great melancholy invaded his soul. 
CHAPTER I 3 
Hanuman's Dilenma 
Descending on to the ramparts from the aerial car, that leader 
of monkeys, the agile Hanuman, resembled a flash of lightning 
athwart the clouds and, having searched the apartments of 
Ravana without finding Sita, Videha's daughter, he said to 
himself: — 
" Seeking the object of Rama's affection, I have explored 
Lanka again and again without rinding the daughter of Janaka 
of immaculate form 1 Many times have the marshes, pools, 
365 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
lakes, streams, rivers, banks, forests and inaccessible mountains 
been scoured by me without any trace of Sita being found ! 
" The King of the Vultures, Sampati, affirmed that Sita 
was in Havana's palace but I do not see her there, how can 
this be ? Or has the daughter of Videha, Maithili, born of 
Janaka, who was carried away against her will, being wholly 
helpless surrendered to Havana? Or perchance, fearing Rama's 
arrows, in his rapid flight, that titan has allowed Sita to slip 
from his grasp or she seeing herself borne away on the path 
of the Siddhas and beholding the ocean, has yielded up her 
life ? Who can say whether that noble large-eyed lady has not 
succumbed on account of the great speed assumed by Ravana 
and the pressure of his arms ? 
" It may happen that, while Ravana flew over the sea, the 
daughter of Janaka struggling to free herself, fell into the waves, 
or alas, far from her lord, seeking to defend her honour, was 
devoured by that vile Ravana. May not that innocent dark eyed lady have become the food of those impure consorts of 
that Indra of demons ? Ever absorbed in the contemplation of 
Rama, whose countenance resembles the moon, has she 
breathed her last, bewailing her lot and crying : * O Rama ! 
0 Lakshmana J O Ayodhya ! ', or, having been banished to 
the dungeons of Ravana's palace, is that youthful woman 
grieving like a caged bird? How could the slender-waisted 
consort of Rama, born of the blood of Janaka, possessing eyes 
like lotus petals, submit to Ravana ? But whether she be slain 
or is lost or has died, I dare not speak of it to Rama. To 
tell him would be an offence, yet it is also wrong to with hold it from him ; what should I do ? I am perplexed ! In 
such a dilemna, how shall I act ? " 
Thus thinking, Hanuman added : — " If, without finding Sita, 
1 return to the city of that lord among monkeys, in how far 
will my courage have availed me ? My crossing of the ocean 
has come to nought as also my entry into Lanka and my 
survey of the titans. When I come to Kishkindha, what will 
Sugriva and the assembled monkeys say to me or those twin 
sons of Dasaratha ? If I approach Kakutstha with these fatal 
tidings saying : ' I have not found Sita ', he will give up his 
life. Hearing these cruel, terrible, heartrending and barbarous 
366 
SUNDARA KANDA 
words, he will not survive and, when his mind has been with drawn into the five elements, the sagacious Lakshmana, deeply 
attached to Rama, will also cease to exist ! Then, hearing that 
his two brothers are dead, Bharata will yield up his life and 
Shatrughna will renounce his existence also. Beholding their 
sons dead, their mothers, Kaushalya, Sumitra and Kaikeyi 
will undoubtedly surrender their lives and, seeing Rama's 
plight, his grateful and loyal friend, Sugriva, will give up 
his life. Then the grief-stricken Ruma, distracted and crushed 
with sorrow, will perish on account of her lord and the Queen 
Tara, already inconsolable on account of Bali's end, worn out 
by suffering will be unable to continue living. The loss of 
his parents will lead the youthful Angada to the brink of death 
and, overwhelmed by the passing of their leader, the inhabitants 
of the woods having been cherished with gentleness, gifts and 
regard by their illustrious monarch, will strike their heads 
with their fists and die. 
" Thenceforth, those foremost of monkeys will no longer 
assemble to disport themselves in the woods, among the rocks 
and caves, but with their sons, wives and servants, in despair 
on account of their master's death, will hurl themselves from 
the height of the rocks into the abysses and chasms. And they 
will take poison or hang themselves or enter the fire or fast 
to death or fall on their own weapons. It is certain that a great 
calamity will follow my return and the House of Ikshwaku 
and the inhabitants of the forests will meet with destruction. 
" But, if I do not return, those two virtuous and great car warriors as also the swift-footed monkeys will continue to live 
in the hope of receiving tidings of Sita, and I, not having 
found Sita, shall exist by that which falls to my lot, living a 
life of privation and subsisting on fruit and roots in the forest. 
" Preparing a funeral pyre on the shores of the sea, in a place 
abounding in roots, fruits and water, I shall enter the names 
or allow myself to die of hunger and, without fail, offer my 
emaciated frame as food for the birds and beasts of prey. 
In my belief, this is the death the sages envisaged for them selves ; either I must find Janaki or enter the sea. 
" My bright garland of glory, so nobly plaited and begot 
of courageous acts has perished because I have not been able 
367 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
to find Sita. I shall therefore become an ascetic living under 
the trees but return I will not without having seen that dark eyed damsel. If I go back without finding Sita, neither 
Angada nor the other monkeys will survive. Yet incalculable 
ills lie in store for one taking his own life ; if however I con tinue to live, I may achieve success, therefore I shall maintain 
my existence ! If I live, the re-union of Rama and Sita may 
be effected." 
Revolving these innumerable and painful considerations in 
his mind, that lion among monkeys sought to prevent himself 
from being overcome by despair. Summoning up all his 
courage, that mighty monkey said to himself: — 
" I shall slay Dashagriva the terrible Ravana and thus 
avenge the abduction of Sita or, crossing the sea, I shall drag 
him before Rama as a beast is offered up to Pashupati." 
Reflecting thus, that monkey, who was filled with anxiety 
and grief, not having been able to find Sita, thought : " So 
long as I do not find the illustrious consort of Rama, I shall 
not cease from searching the city of Lanka on every side. If, 
according to Sampati's words, I bring Rama hither, Raghava, 
not beholding his consort, will burn all the monkeys with 
the fire of his wrath. Therefore I shall stay here, living a 
life of abstinence with my senses under control lest all men 
and monkeys perish through my fault. 
" Here is a great Ashoka grove, containing huge trees, which 
has not yet been searched by me. Having paid reverence to 
the Vasus, the Rudras, the Adityas, the Ashwins and the 
Maruts, in order to increase the torment of the titans, I shall 
enter it. Having vanquished the demons, I shall restore the 
divine Sita, the delight of the House of Ikshwaku to Rama 
as the fruit of austerity is bestowed on an ascetic." 
Having thus reflected for a space, the mighty offspring of 
the Wind-god suddenly rose and said : " Salutations to Rama 
accompanied by Lakshmana and Anila ! Salutations to Chandra, 
Agni and the Maruts ! " 
After paying obeisance to all the Gods as also to Sugriva, 
the offspring of the Wind-god, surveying the four quarters, 
in imagination as it were advanced towards that magnificent 
grove and began to consider what should be done further. 
363 
SUNDARA KANDA 
He reflected : " This Ashoka Grove which is sacred with 
its dense thickets must be filled with titans, its trees are surely 
protected by trained guards and the blessed Vishvatam 
himself refrains from blowing vigorously here. In Rama's 
interests I shall contract my form so that I may not be detected 
by Ravana. May all the Gods, as also the hosts of sages, 
confer success on me ! May Swyambhu, the Celestial Beings, 
as also the ascetics, the God of Fire, the God of the Wind, 
the Bearer of the Thunderbolt, Varuna, the Moon and the 
Sun, the high-souled Ashwins and all the Maruts grant me 
success ! May all beings and the Lord of all Beings and 
those unknown, who are met with on the way, confer success 
on me ! 
" When shall I behold that noble and irreproachable queen 
with her arched nose, pearly teeth, sweet smile and eyes 
resembling lotus petals, bright as the King of the Stars, O when ? 
" O how will that frail and virtuous one, ruthlessly borne 
away by that wicked and vile wretch, the scourge of human 
beings, who masks his savagery under an alluring disguise, 
disclose herself to me ? " 
chapter 14 
The Ashoka Grove 
Having meditated for a space, Hanuman, who had rejoined 
Sita in thought, leapt from the rampart on to the surrounding 
wall and trembling with delight, that mighty monkey, standing 
there, beheld every variety of tree and flower, it being early 
spring He saw Sala, Ashoka, Bhavya, Champaka, Uddalaka, 
Nagavriksha, Mango and Kapimukha trees in flower with 
clumps of Amras intertwined with hundreds of creepers. 
And Hanuman, leaping down into that enchanting grove, 
like an arrow shot from a bow, entered that garden resembling 
the rising sun which re-echoed to the song of birds, planted 
369 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
with gold and silver saplings and containing flocks of birds 
and deer with trees of varying fragrance which .filled him 
with wonder. 
Abounding in trees of every kind, laden with flowers and 
fruit, where cuckoos called deliriously and swarms of bees 
hummed, where all creatures expressed happiness in their 
movements, where the cries of the peacock could be heard and 
waterfowl teemed, the heart of the beholder was ravished. 
And Hanuman, searching for that princess of beautiful and 
faultless limbs, woke the birds that had been sleeping sweetly 
and blown by the wind set up by the wings of those birds in 
flight, a shower of variegated blossom fell, covering Hanuman, 
the son of the Wind-god in the midst of the Ashoka Grove 
lending him the loveliness of a hill covered with flowers. 
Then all the creatures beholding that monkey, as they darted 
from all sides, thought : " It is the God of Spring ". 
Wholly hidden in blossom which had fallen from the trees, 
the earth looked like a bride covered with jewels and, shaken 
in diverse ways by the motion of that impetuous monkey 
the trees rained down a shower of multi-coloured blooms. 
And those trees, whose tops were stripped of leaves, from 
which both blossom and fruit had fallen, looked like gamblers 
who have staked their raiment and possessions only to lose 
all. Buffetted by Hanuman's leaping, those lovely trees 
speedily let their flowers, leaves and fruit fall to the ground 
and, deserted by the birds, no longer able to seek shelter there, 
on account of the shaking administered by Maruti, presented 
their bare branches only, so that the Ashoka grove, battered 
by the blows of the monkey's feet and tail, resembled a youthful 
woman with her locks dishevelled, the brightness of her lips 
and teeth dimmed, her tilaka mark effaced and her arms and 
legs scarred. And in his haste, that monkey snapped the 
clusters of creepers as the wind dispels the clouds during the 
rainy season. 
Banging here and there, that monkey observed places that 
were paved with gold and silver with ponds filled with trans lucent water, their steps encrusted with valuable gems, pearls 
and coral, their floors being of crystal and the banks set with 
trees of Kancana gold which emitted a dazzling light. 
370 
SUNDARA KANDA 
These pools were covered with clumps of lotuses and lilies 
whilst waterfowl enhanced their beauty and they re-echoed 
to the cry of Natyuhas, swans and geese ; broad and beautiful 
streams, bordered on every side by trees, fed them with their 
waters which resembled Amrita and glided under variegated 
shrubs decorated by hundreds of creepers, the ground being 
carpeted by rhododendron and oleander flowers. 
Then that foremost of monkeys beheld a high hill, bright as a 
cloud crowned with lofty peaks, many kinds of trees and filled 
with caves, and it was one of the wonders of the world ! And 
he beheld a river falling from those heights, like a youthful 
woman tearing herself from her lover's aims in order to leave 
him and the branches of the trees, sweeping the water, looked 
as if the companions of that damsel were detaining her, whilst 
fuither down, Hanuman beheld that stream returning on its 
course, as if the maiden, appeased, were reconciled to her beloved. 
Thereafter at some distance from the river, a pool filled with 
lotuses, frequented by birds of every kind drew the gaze of 
that lion among monkeys, Hanuman, born of Maruta ; and 
he saw a fountain of fresh water with enchanting steps made of 
precious gems, its basin strewn with pearls, which was embellished 
on every side with countless herds of deer, ravishing groves, 
and mansions built by Vishvakarma himself, adorned with 
artificial woods and trees laden with fruit and flowers, their 
branches spreading like umbrellas giving shade, whilst the 
ground beneath was paved with gold and silver. 
And that great monkey beheld a single golden Shingshapa 
tree surrounded by a golden dais and he saw many flower beds 
and trees which resembled flames, the radiance of which 
rivalled Mount Meru and caused him to think they were made 
of gold. Seeing those beautiful golden trees, with their 
flowering crests, buds and shoots agitated by the wind, 
emitting a sound like the tinkling of many ornaments, Hanuman 
was astounded. 
Climbing quickly into that many-leafed Shingshapa tree 
Hanuman reflected : " From here I may perchance behold 
Vaidehij that unhappy being who sighs for Rama's presence 
and who, filled with grief, wanders aimlessly to and fro. 
Without doubt, this Ashoka Grove embellished by Candana, 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Champaka and Vakula trees, belongs to the wicked Havana. 
Here by this lovely pool frequented by birds, that princess and 
royal spouse, Sita, will certainly repair. She, the beloved of 
Raghava, accustomed to wander in the woods, bereft of Rama, 
will assuredly come hither. That lady, whose eyes resemble 
a doe's, tormented with grief on account of separation from 
Rama, fond of roving in the woods, will certainly walk in this 
grove. She, the chaste and virtuous wife of Rama, Janaka's 
daughter, who ever loved the creatures of the forest, anxious 
to offer up her devotion, will come to this river of translucent 
waters, for this purpose. 
" Truly this beautiful grove is worthy to be the abode of that 
chaste consort of the king of men, Rama. If that goddess, 
whose countenance resembles the moon, still lives, she will 
inevitably visit this river of cool waters." 
Thus reflected the high-souled Hanuman, expecting the 
consort of that lord of men to appear and, concealing himself 
in the Shingshapa tree covered with leaves and flowers, gazed 
out over the whole scene. 
CHAPTER 15 
Hanuman sees Sita 
Seated in the tree, glancing round in quest of Sita, Hanuman 
surveyed the entire grove filled with trees intertwined with 
creepers and redolent with celestial odours. Manifesting 
every aspect of beauty, possessing the splendour of the Nandana 
Gardens, it was inhabited by various animals and birds, 
embellished by palaces and temples and re-echoed to the call 
of the cuckoo. Adorned with pools filled with golden lotuses 
and silvery waterlilies, furnished with seats and cushions, 
buildings and courtyards, with its ravishing trees laden with 
fruit and flowers in every season and the blossoming Ashoka 
trees, it resembled the effulgence of the rising sun. 
Seated there, Maruti never wearied of gazing on those 
lovely woods, whose foliage was almost concealed by hundreds 
of birds disporting themselves there and the beauty of those 
372 
SUNDARA KANDA 
Ashoka trees, bending under the weight of their flowers, so 
that their blossoming seemed to extend to their very roots, 
dispelled all sorrow. The entire region seemed ablaze with 
the brilliance of the Karnikara and Kimshuka trees in flower ; 
the giant-rooted Punnaga, Saptaparna, Champaka and Udda laka blazed forth in blossom and there were thousands of 
Ashoka trees some of a golden colour, some like flames of 
fire and some as dark as collyrium so that the whole place 
resembled the Garden of Nandana or the enchanting domain of 
Chaitaratha or even surpassed them. This celestial un imaginably beautiful region was like a second heaven, having 
flowers for its constellations or a fifth ocean, its pearls being 
the blossom scattered there. Planted with trees, which bloomed 
in every season, emitting honeyed scents, that garden was filled 
with the cries of birds and beasts and redolent with 
exquisite scents, a delicious spot, equal to that King of Moun tains, a second Gandhamadana. 
Now, in that Ashoka Grove, that lion among monkeys 
observed, at a short distance, a splendid temple as white as 
Mount Kailasha, flawless, supported by a thousand pillars, 
its steps of coral, its floors of refined gold, dazzlingly beautiful, 
blinding to the eyes and of such a height that it seemed to 
kiss the sky. 
Then, all at once, he beheld a woman, in soiled raiment, 
surrounded by female titans and she was emaciated through 
fasting, sorrowful, heaving frequent sighs, immaculate as the 
moon's disc in its first quarter, resplendent with a radiance 
which now shone but dimly so that she seemed like a flame 
wreathed in smoke. 
Clad in a soiled robe of yellow silk, divested of every orna ment, she resembled a lotus pool stripped of its flowers. 
Oppressed, racked with grief and tormented, she was like 
unto Rohini pursued by Ketu. Her face bathed in tears, 
distressed, worn out by privation, plunged in anxiety and 
separated from her kith and kin, no longer able to behold 
Rama and Lakshmana but only the titans, she appeared like 
a gazelle surrounded by a pack of hounds. 
With her long hair resembling a black serpent, hanging 
down her back, she looked like the earth with its dark blue 
373 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
forests in the rainy season. That large-eyed lady, worthy of 
happiness, not having known adversity till that hour, sunk 
in woe and emaciated was attired in soiled raiment. 
Then Hanuman, beholding her, for many reasons deduced 
that it was Sita and reflected : — " That princess, borne away 
by the titan, able to change his shape at will, must be this 
woman before me." 
Her race shone like the full moon and she possessed beautiful 
brows and gracefully rounded breasts ; by her radiance she 
dispelled the darkness in all regions ; her neck was of a bluish 
tint, her lips like the Bimba fruit, her waist slender and her 
carriage full of dignity, her eyes, resembling lotus petals equalled 
those of Rati, the beloved spouse of Manmatha, lovely as the 
moon, adored by all. 
Now that youthful woman of graceful form was seated on 
the ground practising austerity like a female ascetic and that 
timid lady was heaving frequent sighs like the consort of the 
Serpent King. 
Entangled in a mighty web of sorrow, her beauty was veiled 
like a flame enveloped in smoke or a traditional text obscured 
by dubious interpretation or wealth that is melting away or 
faith that is languishing or hope that is almost extinguished 
or perfection unattained on account of obstacles or an intellect 
which is darkened or fame tarnished by calumny. 
Distracted by her separation from Rama, tormented by the 
presence of the female titans, her eyes, like a young doe's 
ranged here and there searching everywhere in her distress. 
Tears streamed from her eyes with their arched brows and dark 
lashes and, her features altered, she sighed again and again. 
That unfortunate one, worthy of every decoration, now bereft 
of all, covered with stains, resembled the King of the Stars 
obscured by heavy cloud. Beholding Sita in that pitiable 
state, Hanuman was perplexed as one whose learning is lost 
for lack of sustained endeavour and, seeing her without ornaments, 
he recognised her with difficulty as a text that is wrongly 
construed. Beholding that large-eyed and irreproachable 
princess, Hanuman concluded from her many distinctive 
characteristics that it must indeed be Sita. 
Perceiving on her person such ornaments as had been 
374 
SUNDARA KANDA 
described by Rama at the time of his departure, such as the 
Svadangstras and jewelled armlets, which were now darkened 
by dust and neglect, nevertheless, they appeared to Hanuman 
to be those mentioned to him and he reflected : — " Those 
which were cast off by Sita on the way, I do not see but those 
she preserved are certainly here. 
" The rich silken mantle shining like Kanaka gold, which she 
let fall, was found by the monkeys caught in a tree and the 
valuable ornaments cast off by her fell on the earth with a 
tinkling sound. The robe she now wears is exceedingly worn 
but its colour remains and resembles her own radiance. Here 
is the one for whom Rama has suffered torment through 
affection, pity, grief and love : through affection in con sequence of bis beloved spouse being borne away ; through 
pity, by his inability to protect her who is dependent on him ; 
through grief, at her loss, and through love by his separation 
from her. Verily from the grace of her person and her beauty, 
that resembles his, this lady of dark eyes must be his spouse. 
She has her mind fixed on him, and he on her, it is on account 
of this that they are able to survive. Indeed the Lord Rama 
has achieved a great feat by still existing separated from her 
and not yielding up his life in grief." 
Having beheld Sita, the Son of Pavana allowed his 
thoughts to fly to Rama, to whom he silently offered obeisance, 
and to that princess also. 
CHAPTER 16 
Hanuman's Reflections on seeing Sita 
Having offered obeisance to Sita who was worthy of homage, 
and also to Rama of gentle conduct, that bull among monkeys 
became absorbed in thought once more. 
Reflecting awhile, his eyes full of tears on account of Sita, 
that sagacious monkey, Hanuman, gave voice to his distress 
in the following words : — 
" None can withstand the force of destiny, since Sita, the 
consort of the illustrious brother of Lakshmana ever obedient 
375 
THE RAM'AYANA OF VALMIK^I 
to his preceptors, has met with this misfortune. Conversant 
with the prowess of Kama and the sagacious Lakshmana, 
that divine lady is no more perturbed than is the Ganges at 
the approach of the rainy season. In character, age, conduct 
and family, they are equal and Raghava is worthy of Vaidehi, 
that one of dark eyes, who is his." 
Seeing Sita, radiant as newly minted gold and who resembled 
Lakshmi beloved of the worlds, Hanuman approaching Rama 
in thought, said : — 
" On account of this large-eyed lady, the mighty Bali was 
slain, and Kabanda, equal to him in strength ; for her, the 
mighty demon Viradha, despite his renowned prowess, also 
succumbed in the forest under the thrusts of the valiant Rama, 
as Shambara under Mahendra's blows. It was for her that 
fourteen thousand demons of outstanding exploits were pierced 
by Rama's arrows resembling tongues of fire in Janasthana. 
Khara too was brought low on the field of battle ; Trishiras 
was overthrown and the mighty Dushana also by the righteous 
Raghava. And it was on her account that that supreme and 
inaccessible kingdom of the monkeys belonging to Bah was 
acquired by Sugriva, renowned in the Three Worlds ; it is 
for this large-eyed damsel, that the effulgent Lord of the 
Waters has been crossed by me and this city explored. Me thinks that if Rama had turned the whole earth, with its boun daries, upside down for her sake, it were fitting ! Were the 
dominion of the Three Worlds on one side and Sita, born of 
Janaka, on the other, the former would not equal a fraction of 
the latter ; such is the virtuous daughter of the magnanimous 
King of Mithila, who is wholly devoted to her lord. She, 
as a field was being dug, rose from a furrow which the blade 
of the plough had turned, covered with dust which gleamed 
like the pollen of a lotus ; she, the eldest daughter-in-law of 
King Dasaratha, who was full of courage and nobility and 
was never known to retreat in battle ; she, the beloved consort 
of the faithful and dutiful Rama, knower of his own Self, is 
now in the power of the titans. 
" Renouncing every pleasure, actuated by love of her lord, 
disregarding the inevitable privations, she entered the beautiful 
forest to live on fruit and roots, ever engaged in the service of 
376 
SU4N£DARA KANDA 
her spouse and considered herself to have attained the peak 
of felicity there, as if it were the palace itself. This lady, 
whose limbs resemble Kanaka gold and who was ever wont 
to smile when conversing, now suffers unimaginable woes and 
Raghava, like a thirsty man panting for a stream, sighs for 
the sight of that noble woman oppressed by Ravana. Re united with her, Raghava will enjoy felicity once more, as a 
king who has been deprived of his throne rejoices on regaining it. 
" Deprived of all comfort and pleasure, far from her kinsmen, 
she preserves her life in the hope of seeing Rama and being re united with him. Oblivious of the titans and the trees covered 
with fruit and flowers, her spirit is wholly absorbed in the 
thought of Rama. For a woman the greatest decoration is 
her lord and Sita, though incomparably beautiful, no longer 
shines in Rama's absence. It is only Rama's heroism that 
makes it possible for him to continue living separated from 
his consort and prevents him from being overwhelmed with grief. 
This lady of dark eyes, resembling the moonlight, worthy of 
happiness, is now utterly wretched and my heart is troubled. 
Patient as the earth, this lady whose eyes resemble lotuses, 
who was formerly protected by Rama and Lakshmana, lying 
at the foot of a tree, is being guarded by demons of hideous 
aspect. Like a waterlily snapped by the frost, the daughter 
of Janaka, her beauty faded, is fainting under the rain of 
misfortunes and, like a doe separated from the herd, is fallen 
into this distress. The Ashoka trees with their boughs bend ing under the weight of their blossom seem to increase her 
grief, as also the moon of pure beams that is rising in this 
spring season." 
Reflecting thus, that valiant monkey, being convinced that 
it was Sita, stationed himself in the Shingshapa tree. 
chapter 17 
Description of the Female Titans toko guarded Sita 
Then the moon, pure as a waterlily, rose in the stainless heavens, 
sailing through the firmament like a swan floating on blue waters. 
377 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
As if to aid him with her light, that pure and clear orb covered 
the Son of Pavana with her cool rays. 
Thereupon that monkey beheld Sita endowed with a moon like countenance who, under the load of grief, resembled a 
heavily laden ship foundering in the waves. And gazing on 
Vaidehi, Hanuman, born of Maruta, observed a number of 
grim-visaged titan women at a distance, some with but a 
single eye or ear, some with ears concealing their visage, some 
without ears, some with noses on their foreheads, some 
possessed of disproportionately large heads and long necks, 
some with sparse hair and others covered with hair so that 
they appeared to be wrapped in a woollen cloth ; the ears and 
brows of some were set low, and their breasts and bellies 
protruded ; others were knock-kneed, stunted, humpbacked, 
crooked, dwarfed, unkempt, their mouths set awry, their eyes 
inflamed, their faces fearful to behold Hideous, irascible, 
quarrelsome, they were armed with spears, darts, hammers 
and mallets and some had snouts like bears or the muzzles of 
deer or the faces of tigers, camels, buffalo, goats and jackals 
and some had the feet of elephants, camels, horses and the 
heads of some were sunk in their breasts. 
Some had a single hand or foot, some the ears of asses, 
horses, kjne and elephants or some the ears of monkeys. Some 
had enormous noses, some crooked noses and some none at all, 
some had noses like the trunks of elephants, some had their 
noses fixed in their foreheads, through which they breathed 
like beasts. The feet of some were like elephants and some 
had the feet of kine, some were hairy ; some had huge heads, 
gigantic faces and long tongues ; some had the heads of goats, 
elephants, cows, pigs, horses, camels and donkeys. 
These titan women of formidable appearance held spears 
and maces in their hands, they were ill-humoured and rejoiced 
in discord. Their hair was black as soot or smoke-coloured, 
their aspect repellant and they feasted continually, regaling 
themselves on wine and meat without surcease, their bodies 
being spattered with blood from the flesh they consumed. 
That foremost of monkeys surveyed those titan women 
whose appearance caused his hair to stand on end and who 
were seated in a circle round the many-branched tree under 
378 
sun;dara kanda 
which the divine and irreproachable Janaki stood. And the 
graceful Hanuman beheld that daughter of Janaka bereft of 
her radiance, consumed with grief, her locks soiled with dust, 
like a star which has fallen on the earth its merits exhausted, 
Sita, famed throughout the worlds for her fidelity, yet with 
little hope of being re-united with her lord. 
Stripped of her jewels, she whose chief ornament was her 
devotion to her lord, held captive by Ravana, appeared like a 
female elephant separated from the herd who has been attacked 
by a lion or like the moonlight enveloped in cloud at the 
end of the rainy season. Her beauty dimmed, she resembled 
a stringed instrument that one has ceased to pluck and has laid 
aside. Far from her lord, that illustrious one had fallen under 
the sway of the titans without having merited it. Sunk in 
an ocean of grief, surrounded by those titan women in the 
midst of the Ashoka Grove, she looked like Rohini about to 
be devoured by Rahu and, beholding her there, Hanuman 
thought she resembled a creeper divested of its blooms. 
Having lost her radiance, her limbs covered with dust, with 
her hidden grace she looked like a lotus spattered with mud. 
The monkey, Hanuman, beheld that youthful woman, whose 
eyes resembled a doe's, clothed in a soiled and tattered cloth 
and though that blessed one was shorn of her beauty, yet her 
soul did not lose its transcendency, upheld as it was by the 
thought of Rama's glory and safeguarded by her own virtue. 
Beholding Sita, whose eyes, wide with fear, resembled a 
doe's, casting her glances here and there like a fawn and con suming the trees and their leaves with her sighs, like a moun tainous wave rising from the ocean of adversity, incomparably 
beautiful with her slender limbs and graceful form, bereft of 
ornaments, Maruti experienced a great felicity ; and Hanuman 
wept tears of joy at this fortunate meeting and silendy offered 
obeisance to Rama. 
Having bowed down to Rama and Lakshmana, the valiant 
Hanuman, filled with happiness on having beheld Sita, remained 
there wholly concealed. 
379 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 18 
Ravana goes to the Ashoka Grove 
Surveying the woods filled with flowering trees, desirous of 
beholding Sita closely and the night being almost spent, towards 
dawn, Hanuman heard the chanting of the Vedas by those 
among the titans conversant with the holy Shastras and the 
six supplementary portions.1 
Then the mighty ten-headed Lord of the Titans awoke to 
the sound of auspicious music, delightful to the ear and, 
waking, that great and powerful king, his garlands and attire 
in disarray, remembered Vaidehi. Passionately enamoured of 
her, that titan filled with pride could not restrain his desire. 
Thereupon, adorned with every kind of ornament, gor geously robed, he entered the Ashoka Grove filled with in numerable trees, laden with fruit and flowers of every kind 
with pools embellished with lotuses and lilies, enlivened by 
birds of rare beauty ecstatic with love and sculptured wolves 
wonderful to behold. 
Dashagriva gazed on those avenues with their arches of gold 
and gems, thronged with deer of every sort and carpeted with 
the fruit that had fallen on the earth. And one hundred 
damsels, daughters of the Gods and Gandharvas, followed in 
the train of the son of Poulastya, resembling the nymphs who 
follow Mahendra and some carried lamps of gold whilst 
others bore chanwaras and tans in their hands. Some carrying 
water in golden ewers, walked ahead, others following with a 
golden seat and round cushions and one on his right bore 
a cup encrusted with gems and filled with wine whilst another 
carried a canopy resembling a swan, golden-ribbed like the 
moon and having a handle of fine gold. 
In this way, the most beautiful of Ravana's wives, their eyes 
heavy with sleep and wine followed their august lord like 
' Grammer, Prosody, Astronomy, Pronunciation, the meaning of un usual terms and Ritual. 
380 
SUNDARA KANDA 
flashes of lightning following a cloud. Their bracelets and 
necklets of pearl, swung to and fro, their sandal-paste was 
effaced and their hair hung loose while drops of perspiration 
stood on the brows of those women of lovely mien who stumbled 
on account of the effects of wine and sleep, and the sweat had 
caused the flowers that adorned them to wither and their 
locks were full of shreds from their garlands j in this way, 
those women of tender appearance full of pride and affection, 
followed the King of the Titans. 
And that powerful lord, the slave of his desires, his heart 
fixed on Sita, proceeded at a slow pace. 
Then the monkey heard the sound of the bells on the women's 
girdles and anklets, and the joy of Maruta beheld Ravana of 
inconceivable prowess, whose energy and valour were un imaginable, as he entered the gate ; and he was illumined on 
all sides by the innumerable lamps, fed with fragrant oil, 
which were carried by those damsels and, intoxicated with 
pride, desire and wine, his eyes of a coppery red, he looked 
like Kandarpa himself bereft of his bow. He adjusted his 
magnificent cloak, decorated with flowers, stainless as the foam of 
Amrita when churned, and which flung back was held by a clasp. 
Hanuman, concealed behind the curtain of leafy branches, 
stared at him as he approached and from his hiding place, 
that elephant among monkeys beheld that mighty king, Ravana, 
surrounded by beautiful and youthful brides, with majestic 
strides enter that grove, which re-echoed to the cry of deer 
and birds. Already intoxicated, adorned with priceless orna ments, possessing pointed ears resembling darts, full of energy, 
that Son of Vaishravas, the Lord of the Titans, appeared sur rounded by lovely women, as the moon amidst the stars, and 
that illustrious monkey, beholding him, reflected : — 
" This is the long-armed Ravana who was formerly sleeping 
in that sumptuous apartment in the centre of the city." 
Then the valiant Hanuman, born of Maruta, despite his 
great courage and though highly effulgent, found himself eclipsed 
by Ravana's glory and effaced himself among the leafy branches. 
Ravana however, eager to see that dark-eyed Sita of faultless 
limbs, whose breasts touched each other, and whose tresses 
were black, strode on. 
381 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 19 
Sita's Grief 
Beholding Havana, the Lord of the Titans, endowed with 
youth and beauty, wearing gorgeous raiment and priceless 
jewels, that irreproachable princess trembled like a palm 
agitated by the wind and, covering her breasts and belly with 
her hands, seeking to conceal them, shrank away. 
Dashagriva gazed on Vaidehi, who was guarded by com panies of female titans and that unfortunate One, given over 
to grief, resembled a ship foundering in the sea. 
Seated on the naked ground, Sita who was fixed in virtue, 
resembled a branch severed from a tree that has fallen to earth. 
Her limbs covered with a soiled cloth, she, who was worthy of 
ornaments, now no longer adorned, resembled a lotus stalk 
stained with mud and, though radiant, her beauty was dimmed. 
In imagination, she took refuge with that lion among men, 
Rama, her mind a chariot drawn by the steeds of resolution 
and that charming princess, devoted to Rama, emaciated, 
weeping, separated from her kinsfolk, was a prey to anxiety 
and grief and saw no end to her misfortune. Rocking herself 
to and fro, she resembled the female of the King of the Snakes 
under the spell of an incantation or the planet Rohini pursued 
by Dhumaketu or a saintly and virtuous woman of a noble 
house who finds herself, through marriage, placed in a low born family. She resembled a great reputation that has been 
lost or a faith that has been disregarded or a mind that has 
become clouded or a hope destroyed, a future shattered, an 
order misinterpreted, a region obliterated at the destruction of 
the world or an offering rejected by the Gods, a night on 
which the full moon is obscured by clouds or a lotus pool laid 
waste, an army bereft of its warriors, a moon under eclipse, 
a dried up river, an altar which has been desecrated or a flame 
382 
SUNDARA KANDA 
that has been extinguished or a lotus pool bereft of flowers, 
its birds struck with terror agitated by the trumpeting of 
elephants. 
In separation from her lord, consumed with grief, she 
appeared like a river whose waters have run dry and on account 
of her limbs not having been washed, she resembled night 
during the period of the waning moon. That lovely and 
graceful woman, accustomed to a palace rilled with precious 
gems, now, with wasted limbs, resembled the stalk of a lotus 
freshly plucked and wilting in the sun. 
As the female elephant which has been captured, chained 
to a stake, grieving for its mate, sighs again and again, so 
seemed she. Her long dark tresses, utterly neglected, lay 
along her back so that she appeared like the earth covered 
with a dark forest at the end of the rainy season. Tortured 
by hunger, sorrow, anxiety and fear, emaciated, desolate, 
weakened by abstinence and given over to austerity, stricken 
with grief, resembling a goddess, her hands were joined 
offering prayers to Rama for the destruction of Ravana. 
And beholding that blameless Maithili with her beautiful 
dark eyes and graceful lashes, Ravana, to his own destruction, 
sought to seduce her. 
CHAPTER 20 
Ravana begs Sita to iced him 
Thereupon Ravana approaching Sita, who was helpless, sur rounded by female titans and vowed to a life of austerity, with 
sweet words and courteous gestures said to her : — 
" O Thou whose thighs resemble the trunk of an elephant, 
who, beholding me dost seek to conceal thy breasts and thy 
body as if thou didst fear me, O Lady of large eyes, I love 
thee. Be gracious to me, O Thou of charming looks, who art 
adored by all the world I There is no man present here nor 
any titan able to change his form at will therefore banish the 
fear which I inspire in thee, O Sita. 
383 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
" It has ever been the unquestioned and special privilege of 
titans to unite themselves with the wives of others, either 
taking them of their own free will or bearing them away by 
force. In spite of this, O Maithili, I shall not lay hands on 
thee since thou hast no affection for me but, for myself, I am 
completely under thy sway, therefore trust in me and respond 
to my love. O Goddess, have no fear of me, take courage, 
O Dear One, and do not let thyself be consumed with grief. 
To wear but a single plait, to lie on the earth in soiled attire 
and fast unnecessarily does not become thee. In my company, 
O Maithili, do thou enjoy garlands, perfumes, sandal, orna ments, wine, rich beds and seats, singing, dancing and music. 
Thou art a pearl among women, do not remain in this condi tion, adorn thyself as heretofore. Having united thyself with 
me, O Lady of Lovely Form, what will not be thine ? 
" Thine enchanting youth is passing away, which like the 
water of a river, once gone, does not return. O Thou of 
Fair Looks, the creator of thy loveliness, Vishvakrita, after 
devising thee, ceased from his work for I see none who is 
equal to thee in loveliness and grace ! Who, having seen thee, 
resplendent with beauty, could withstand thee O Vaidehi ? 
Even Brahma Himself is moved, how much more other beings ? 
O Thou whose countenance resembles the moon, on whatever 
part of thy body mine eyes rest, my gaze is riveted. O Maithili, 
do thou become my consort and renounce this thy folly. Be come the foremost queenof these innumerable andlovelywomen 
who belong to me. O Timid One, all the treasure I have 
won throughout the worlds I offer thee as also my kingdom. 
O Sportive Damsel, for thy sake, having subjugated the entire 
earth with its many cities, I will confer them on King Janaka. 
None on this earth can withstand my prowess ; behold mine 
immeasurable valour in battle ! Did not the Celestials and the 
Demons find me irresistible on the battlefield as I broke 
through their ranks shattering their standards ? 
" Therefore yield to my desire and attire thyself in splendid 
robes, letting brilliant gems adorn thy person. O Timid One, 
enjoy every comfort and luxury according to thy pleasure, 
divert thyself and distribute land and treasure to others. Live 
happily depending on my support and exercise supreme 
384 
SUNDARA KANDA 
authority. By my favour, all thy relatives shall share thy 
felicity. Observe my prosperity and glory, O Gentle Lady, 
what canst thou hope from Rama who is clothed in robes of 
bark? O Fortunate One, Rama has been deprived of his 
kingdom and is bereft of his might, he practises asceticism, 
his couch is the bare earth, indeed it is doubtful whether he 
still lives. O Vaidehi, Rama will never be able to find thee, 
thou who resemblest a star veiled by dark clouds preceded 
by cranes. Raghava will never rescue thee from my hands, 
as Hiranyakashipu was not able to recover his consort Kirti, 
who had fallen under the sway of Indra. 
" O Lady of Sweet Smiles, O Thou of lovely teeth and 
beautiful eyes, thou dost ravish my heart as Suparna carried 
away a serpent. Although thy robe is torn and stained and 
thou art stripped of ornaments, seeing thee, my mind turns 
away from all my other consorts. O Daughter of Janaka, do 
thou hold sway over all the women in my harem, who are 
endowed with every accomplishment. O Princess of raven 
locks, these women, the foremost among the beauties of the 
world, shall be thy slaves and attend on thee as the Apsaras 
attend on Shri. O Graceful Princess, enjoy the pleasures of 
the world with me and the riches of Kuvera to the utmost 
of thy desires. O Goddess, neither in asceticism, strength, 
prowess, wealth nor fame is Rama equal to me. Therefore 
drink, eat, enjoy thyself and indulge in every pleasure. I 
shall confer on thee immense wealth, nay, the whole world. 
" Do thou satisfy all thy desires in my company, O Timid 
One, and let thy relatives share thy felicity also. Adorned 
with dazzling golden bracelets, O Beautiful One, in my com pany range the groves of flowering trees on the shores of the 
sea where the black bees hum." 
CHAPTER 21 
Sita rejects Havana's Advances with disdain 
Hearing the words of that terrible titan, Sita, overwhelmed 
with grief, answered in a faint and feeble voice. The un- 
385 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
fortunate Sita, afflicted and trembling, faithful to her lord and 
anxious to preserve her virtue, her heart fixed on Rama, placed 
a straw between Ravana and herself and with a sweet smile 
answered him, saying : — 
" Take bade thy heart and set it on thine own consorts. 
As a sinner may not aspire to heaven, so shouldst thou not 
expect to win me. That which should never be done and is 
condemned in a woman faithful to her lord, I shall never do. 
Born in a noble House, I have been joined to a pious family." 
Having spoken thus to Ravana, the virtuous Vaidehi, turning 
her back on him, continued : — 
" It is not meet that I become thy wife since I am united 
to another. Do thy duty and follow the rules laid down by 
men of integrity. The wives of others, like thine own, are 
deserving of protection, O Prowler of the Night. Do thou 
furnish a good example and enjoy thine own consorts. That 
wretch who, in the inconstancy and levity of his heart, is not 
satisfied with his own wives, will be brought to misery by those 
of others. Either no pious men exist here or thou dost not 
follow their example, since thy mind is perverse and turns 
from what is virtuous; or the wise having uttered sage counsel, 
thou, to the destruction of the titans, dost ignore them. 
" Prosperity, kingdom and city are all brought to nought 
in the hands of a vicious monarch who is not master of himself, 
hence Lanka, overflowing with treasure, having thee for her 
king, will suffer destruction 'ere long. O Ravana, that wicked 
being who brings about his own downfall, succumbs, to the 
delight of all. When thou meetest with thine end, this evil 
deed will cause the oppressed to say : ' Fortunate are we that 
this great tyrant has fallen.' 
" Thou art not able to tempt me with wealth and riches ; 
as the light of the sun cannot be separated from the sun so 
do I belong to Raghava. Having rested on the arm of that 
Lord of Men, how should I depend on any other ? Like unto 
the spiritual truth known to a brahmin faithful to his vows, 
I belong to the Lord of the World alone and am lawfully 
wedded to him. It is to thine own advantage to restore me to 
Rama, wretched as I am, like unto a she-elephant anxiously await ing her mate in the forest. It behoveth thee to seek Rama's 
386 
SUNDARA KANDA 
friendship, that lion among men, if thou desireth to preserve 
Lanka and dost not wish to bring about thine own destruction. 
He is wise, conversant with every duty and ever eager to serve 
those who seek his protection ; form an alliance with him if 
thou desirest to survive. Seek to conciliate Rama, who is 
full of devotion to those who take refuge in him and humbly 
conduct me to him once more. If thou dost bring me back 
to the greatest of the Raghus, thy well-being is assured but 
if thou dost act otherwise thou art doomed. Thou mayest 
evade the thunderbolt of Indra, even death himself may over look thee but there will be no refuge for thee from the fury of 
Raghava, that lord of men, when thou dost hear the terrible 
twanging of Rama's bow resembling the thunderbolt hurled 
by Indra. Soon shall those arrows, bearing the impress of 
Rama and Lakshmana, like serpents with flaming jaws, penetrate 
Lanka and those shafts, decorated with heron's plumes, shall 
cover the whole city annihilating the titans. As Vainateya 
bears away great reptiles, so shall that eagle, Rama, speedily 
bear away the titans. 
" And like unto Vishnu wresting the radiant Shri from the 
Asuras by covering the worlds in three strides, so shall my 
lord, the destroyer of his foes, recover me from thee. 
" This cowardly deed has been perpetrated by thee in order 
to revenge thyself for the destruction of Janasthana and the 
hosts of the titans. In the absence of these two brothers, 
those lions among men who had gone forth hunting, didst 
thou carry me away, O Vile Wretch ; but, dog that thou art, 
thou didst not dare stand before those tigers, Rama and 
Lakshmana ! Wealth and friends will be of no avail to thee 
in conflict with them and thou shalt be defeated as the one handed Vritra who entered into combat with the two-handed 
Indra. 
" Soon shall my protector, Rama, accompanied by Saumitri, 
draw out thy life's breaths, as the sun with its rays dries up 
shallow water. 
Whether thou takest refuge in the abode of Kuvera or 
terrified, descendest into Varuna's realm, thou shalt assuredly 
perish, struck down by the son of Dasaratha, like a mighty 
tree felled by lightning.*' 
387 20 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 22 
Ravana's Threats 
To this stern speech from the gracious Sita, the King of the 
Titans replied harshly :— 
" In the world it is said the more gentleness one manifests 
towards a woman, the more responsive she becomes, but the 
more kindness I show to thee the more thou dost repulse me. 
Verily only the love I bear thee restrains my wrath, as a skilful 
charioteer controls the horses who seek to leave the road. 
Mighty indeed is the power of love, for even if the object of 
his affection invoke his anger, man covers her with pity and 
tenderness. It is on this account, O Lady of lovely mien, 
that I do not slay thee, thou dost merit death and dishonour, 
thou who delightest in asceticism without reason. For each 
and every harsh word which thou hast addressed to me, thou 
meritest a dreadful end, O Maithili." 
Having spoken thus to Sita, the Princess of Videha, Ravana, 
Lord of the Titans, filled with indignation, added : — " I shall 
grant thee two months as the term assigned to thee, after 
which thou must share my bed. If thou should'st refuse, my 
cooks shall mince thy limbs for my morning repast." 
Hearing these threats addressed by the King of the Titans 
to Janaki, the daughters 01 the Gods and Gandharvas were 
exceedingly perturbed and, by the expression of their lips and 
eyes and their gestures sought to reassure Sita thus menaced 
by him. 
Encouraged by them, Sita, fortified by her virtue and her 
pride in Rama, addressed Ravana, the Lord of the Titans, in 
his own interests, saying : — 
" It appears that there is none in this city who desires thy 
welfare and therefore seeks to prevent thee from this despicable 
deed. Who in the Three Worlds would desire to possess the 
chaste consort of the high-souled One, who resembles Indra's 
Sachi ? O Vilest of Demons, how wilt thou escape the con- 
388 
SUKDARA KANDA 
sequences of this insult offered to Rama's consort, he whose 
valour is immeasurable? Like unto an infuriated elephant, 
encountering a hare in the forest, so shah thou, the wretched 
hare, meet with that elephant Rama. Thou dost not fear to 
rail at the Chief of the Ikshwakus so long as thou art not 
in his presence. Why do not those cruel, terrible, coppery 
eyes of thine fall out, looking on me so lustfully, O Ignoble 
Creature ? O Contemptible Wretch, when thou didst threaten 
the spouse of that high-souled Rama, the daughter-in-law of 
King Dasaratha, why did not thy tongue dry up? O Ten necked One, by the power of my asceticism, I could reduce 
thee to ashes instantly had I Rama's mandate. On account 
of my consuming virtue and ascetic observances, I could never 
have been wrested from Rama, were it not that thine evil act 
was to be the cause of thy destruction, O Dashagriva ! Assisted 
by the brother of Kuvera and proud of thine own heroism, 
thou didst lure Rama from the hermitage and succeed in 
bearing me away by stealth." 
Hearing Sita's words, Ravana, the King of the Titans, cast 
ferocious glances at her. Like a mass of black clouds, with 
his enormous arms and neck, endowed with an elephantine 
gait, his eyes smouldering, his tongue like a darting name, of 
immense stature, wearing a plumed diadem, covered with 
necklaces, sprinkled with perfume, decked with garlands and, 
bracelets of gold, his waist encircled with a dark blue belt 
so that it resembled the Mandara mountain encompassed by the 
snake at the time of the churning of the ocean ; with his vast 
arms, the Lord of the Titans looked like a mountain with 
twin peaks. Adorned with earrings gleaming like the rising 
sun, he resembled a hill between two Ashoka trees enveloped 
in crimson flowers and buds or like the wish-fulfilling tree or 
spring incarnate or an altar in a crematorium. 
Then Ravana cast furious glances from his bloodshot eyes 
at the Princess of Videha and, hissing like a serpent, addressed 
her, saying : — " O Thou who art attached to that wretch 
without resource or moral sense, I shall destroy thee to-day 
as the sun*s radiance is obliterated at the time of dusk." 
Having spoken thus to Maithili, Ravana, the oppressor of 
his foes, looked at those female titans of formidable appearance, 
389 
the RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
some of whom had a single eye or car, some enormous ears 
and some the ears of kine or elephants. Some had ears 
that hung down and some none at all, some had the feet of 
elephants, some of horses, some of kine, some were hairy, 
others possessed but a single eye and foot, some had enormous 
feet and others none at all. Some had heads and necks of 
inordinate size, some enormous chests and bellies, some dis proportionately large mouths and eyes or long tongues and 
nails and some had no nose or possessed jaws like lions, some 
had mouths like oxen or snouts like pigs. 
Then Ravana, transfiixing those titans with his glance, said 
to them : — " Ye Titans seek by fair or foul means, by threats 
or persuasion or honeyed words or gifts to induce Sita to 
look on me with favour." 
Repeating his command again and again, the King of the 
Titans filled with desire and anger began to inveigh against 
Janaki, whereupon a female titan named Dhanyamalini, 
approaching Dashagriva, embraced him and said :-— 
" O Great King, enjoy thyself with me, what need hast 
thou for this human being who is wretched and whose counten ance is pale ? O King of the Titans, it is not with her that 
the Gods have destined thee to taste the exquisite pleasures 
that are the reward of the strength of thine arms. He who 
loves one who is unwilling exposes himself to torment, whereas 
he whose love is reciprocated, enjoys perfect happiness." 
Having said this, the female titan drew Ravana away but he, 
resembling a mass of cloud, turned back, laughing scornfully. 
Then Dashagriva strode away, causing the earth to tremble, 
and returned to his palace that shone with the brilliance of 
the orb of day. 
Surrounding Ravana, the daughters of the Gods and Gand harvas as well as those of the Serpent Race returned to that 
sumptuous abode with him. Thus Ravana, distracted with 
desire, left the Princess of Mithila of irreproachable virtue 
trembling and entered his own dwelling. 
39o 
SUNDARA KANDA 
CHAPTER 23 
The Female Titans seek to persuade Sita to wed Ravana 
Having spoken thus to Maithili and issued his commands to 
the titan women, Ravana, the scourge of his foes, went away. 
And that Sovereign of the Titans having returned to his inner 
apartment, those women of hideous appearance bore down on 
Sita and, filled with ire, addressed her in harsh tones, saying: — 
" Thou dost not fully value an alliance with the offspring of 
Poulastya the illustrious Ravana, the magnanimous Dashagriva, 
O Sita." 
Thereafter, one among them named Ekjata, her eyes in flamed with anger addressed Sita of small belly, saying : — 
"According to tradition, Poulastya is the fourth of the six 
Prajapatis, a mind-born son of Brahma renowned in all the 
world, O Sita, and that glorious Ascetic Vaishravas sprang from 
the mind of that great Rishi whose glory equalled the Praja patis. O Large-eyed Princess, his son was Ravana, the scourge 
of his foes; it behoveth thee to become the consort of that 
King of Titans. Why dost thou not consent, O Thou of 
Lovely Form ? " 
Thereupon another titan called Harijata, rolling her eyes 
that resembled a cat's, said furiously : " It is for thee to 
become the wife of one who defeated the thirty-three Celestials 
and their king in combat ; dost thou not desire to be united 
with him who is heroic, of indomitable prowess and never 
turns back in battle ? Renouncing his cherished and beloved 
Queen Mandodari, that mighty King Ravana will be thine, 
and seek the gorgeous inner apartment, enriched by thousands 
of women adorned with jewels, and thou wilt be the object of 
his worship ! " 
There followed another titan by name Vikata, who said : 
" He who again and again triumphs over the Gandharvas, 
Nagas and Danavas by his valour in battle has made advances 
391 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
to thee, why dost thou not wish to be the wife of that illustrious 
Lord of Titans, Ravana, who is endowed with riches ? " 
Thereafter the titan, Durmukhi spoke saying : — " O Lady of 
Lovely Lashes, why dost thou not yield to him, in fear of 
whom the sun dares not shine nor the wind blow, at whose 
command the trees shower down their blooms and the hills 
and clouds loose their floods. 
" O Beautiful One, why dost thou not consent to be the 
consort of that King of kings, Ravana ? We speak thus for 
thy welfare ; accede to our request, O Goddess of Sweet 
Smiles or thou shalt surely die."! 
CHAPTER 24 
Their Menaces 
Thereupon all those titans of hideous appearance, unitedly 
reproached Sita in harsh and unpleasing words, saying : — 
" Why dost thou not consent to dwell in that inner apart ment abounding in costly couches ? O Lady, thou prizest 
union with a mere man ; dismiss Rama from thy thoughts for 
assuredly thou wilt not see him more. Live happily with 
Ravana, the Lord of the Titans as thy consort who owns the 
treasure of the Three Worlds. Thou art a woman, O Irre proachable Beauty, and for this dost mourn a man who is 
banished from his kingdom and who leads a life of misery." 
Hearing the words of those titans, Sita, her lotus eyes filled 
with tears, answered them, saying : — " What you have uttered 
is immoral and wholly reprehensible and will never find 
acceptance with me. A mortal woman may not become the 
wife of a demon. Devour me, if you wish, I will never accede 
to your request. Poor or deprived of his kingdom, he who 
is my husband is my spiritual preceptor and I shall ever follow 
him, as Suvarchala follows the sun or the blessed Sachi re mains at Indra's side or Arundhati near Vasishtha or Rohini 
by Shashin or Lopamudra by Agastya, Sukanya by Syavana, 
392 
SUNDARA KANDA 
Savitri by Satyavat, Shrimati by Kapila, Madayanti by Sandasa, 
Keshini by Sagara and Damayanti, the daughter of King 
Bhima by her Lord Naishada." 
These words of Sita infuriated those titan women, who had 
been sent by Ravana and they overwhelmed her with hard 
and bitter reproaches while Hanuman crouched silently in 
the Shingshapa tree. And that monkey heard those demons 
threatening Sita in this wise. 
Surrounding Sita on every side, licking their burning lips 
again and again and, armed with spears, they menaced her in 
a paroxysm of rage, saying : 
" Dost thou think that the great King of the Titans, Ravana, 
is not worthy to be thy lord ? " 
Threatened by those terrible looking titan women, the lovely 
Sita, wiping away her tears, took refuge beneath the Shingshapa 
tree, where, surrounded by those women, that large-eyed 
princess, overcome with distress, seated herself. And all 
those hideous demons overwhelmed her with reproaches, as, 
clad in a mud-stained sari, reduced to the last extremity, her 
countenance wan, she remained absorbed in her grief. 
Thereupon, a grim-visaged demon, named Vinata, having 
hideous teeth, and a protruding belly, cried out angrily : — 
" O Sita, thou hast demonstrated thy devotion to thy lord 
sufficiently but all excess leads to suffering. May good betide 
thee ! We are satisfied, thou hast preserved the conventions 
common among men, now hear what I say to thee for thy 
good ! Do thou take Ravana for thy lord, he, the chief of the 
titan host who, like unto Vasava, triumphs over his enemies 
and is brave, liberal and gracious to all beings. Forsaking 
that wretched wight, Ramachandra, take Ravana as thy hus band ! Thy person, sprinkled with celestial perfume and adorned 
with excellent ornaments, do thou, O Vaidehi, like unto Swaha, 
the consort of Agni or the goddess Sachi, wife of Indra, from 
to-day become the Queen of the Worlds ! What shalt thou 
do with Rama who is wretched and has but a short time to 
live ? If thou dost not follow my counsel, that very instant 
we shall devour thee." 
Thereafter, another titan, named Vikata, with pendulous 
breasts, clenching her fists angrily addressed Sita, saying :— 
393 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
" O Foolish Daughter of Mitbila's King, out of compassion 
and forbearance, we have endured thy harsh speech and yet 
thou dost not follow our sage and expedient counsel. Thou 
hast been transported to the further shore of the ocean which 
is inaccessible to others ; Ravana has imprisoned thee in his 
private apartments to be guarded by us, O Maithili, not even 
Indra himself can liberate thee. Cease from weeping and 
lamenting and yield thyself up to pleasure and delight, O Sita; 
disport thyself with the King of the Titans. O Timid Damsel, 
dost thou not know how swiftly the youth of women is gone ? 
Ere it fades, pass thy days happily. Till then range the 
enchanting woods, groves and hills with the sovereign of the 
titans, O Thou of Sparkling Eyes ! Thousands of women will 
attend on thee if thou dost take the lord of all the titans as thy 
consort, but if thou dost not follow my counsel, I will tear 
thy heart out and feast on it, O Maithili." 
Then another titan of ferocious looks, named Chandari, 
brandishing a great spear, said : " Seeing this youthful woman, 
with the eyes of a young doe who was carried away by Ravana 
and brought hither, whose breast is now trembling with fear, 
I feel an intense desire to feast on her liver, spleen, breast, 
heart, limbs and head." 
At this, a female titan called Praghasa, said : " Of what use 
to argue about her ? Let us stop the breath in the throat of 
this heartless woman and inform Ravana of her death. He 
will undoubtedly say : * Do ye devour her '." 
The titan, Ajamukhi then said : " Let us divide her equally ; 
disputation is unpleasing to me ; let our favourite drink and 
different garlands be brought hither speedily." 
At that moment the demon Shurpanakha said : " I am in 
full accord with Ajamukhi's words, let wine that dispels all 
anxiety be brought without delay. Gorged with human 
flesh, we will dance in the Nikumbhila Grove." 
Hearing the monstrous titan's threats, Sita, who resembled 
the daughter of a God, her endurance at an end, burst into 
tears. 
394 
SUNDARA KANDA 
CHAPTER 25 
Sita gives way to Despair 
The many barbarous threats of the titan women, caused the 
daughter of Janaka to give way to tears and the noble Vaidehi, 
terror stricken, in a voice broken by sobs, answered them, 
saying : — 
" A mortal woman may not be the wife of a titan ; tear me 
to pieces if you will but I shall never follow your counsels." 
Surrounded by those demons and threatened by Ravana, 
Sita, who resembled the daughter of a God, could find no 
refuge anywhere and, seized with violent trembling, she shrank 
away from them, as a fawn in the forest, separated from the 
herd, surrounded by wolves. Clinging to the flowering branch 
of an Ashoka tree, sunk in grief, Sita bethought herself of her 
lord. Streams of tears bathed her lovely breast and over come with affliction, she could see no end to her distress. 
Like a plantain tree uprooted by the storm, she lay, the fear 
that the titan women inspired in her blanching her cheek ; 
her long thick plait moving to and fro as she shook, resembling 
a gliding serpent. 
Groaning in her grief and overcome with indignation, 
Maithili, weeping, began to lament, exclaiming sorrowfully: — 
" O Rama ! " and again, " O Lakshmana ", " O My Mother 
Kaushalya ", " O Sumitra ". " True indeed is the saying 
of the sages : * neither man nor woman can die ere the hour 
strikes ', since tormented by the savage titans and separated 
from Rama, I am still able to survive an instant. Alas ! A 
woman of little virtue and wretched, I am about to die far 
from my protector as a laden vessel founders in the midst of 
the waves driven by the blast of the tempest. In the absence 
of my lord, I am sinking under the load of my affliction, like 
a river bank undermined by the current. Happy are those who 
are able to look upon my lord, whose eyes resemble the petals 
of the blossoming trees, whose gait is like a lion's and who is 
full of gratitude and gende of speech. Deprived of the 
395 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
presence of Rama of subdued soul, it is as hard for me to 
breathe as for him who has swallowed a virulent poison and 
henceforth my life is forfeit. What heinous fault have I 
committed in a previous existence that I should now have to 
surfer such cruel misfortune ? So intense is my grief that I 
long to die, but alas, I am surrounded by these titan women 
and cannot be reunited with Rama. Cursed is the human 
state, cursed is dependence on others, since one may not yield 
up one's life when one so desires it." 
CHAPTER 26 
Sita prophesies the Titan's Destruction 
Her face bathed in tears, with bowed head the daughter of 
Janaka began to lament once more and, distracted with grief, 
beside herself, she rolled on the earth like a colt as though 
she had lost her senses, crying : — 
" I, the spouse of Raghava, who allowed himself to be 
deceived by the titans able to change their form at will, was 
seized by the ruthless Ravana who bore me away. Having 
been made captive by the titans, subject to their insults and 
menaces, sunk in grief and anxiety, I am no longer able to 
endure life. Of what use is existence, wealth or jewels to me, 
living amidst the demons far from Rama of the great Car ? 
Assuredly my heart must be of iron, ageless and imperishable, 
since it does not break under mine affliction. Woe is me, 
vile and wicked creature that I am, since I still breathe, in 
the absence of my lord. Even my left foot shall not touch that 
Ranger of the Night, how should I feel any love for Ravana, 
a titan ? He, who in his perversity seeks to seduce me, is not 
conversant with my nature, nor my race, nor the aversion in 
which he is held by me. Torn to pieces, rent limb from limb 
or cast into the fire, I shall never submit to Ravana, what use 
is there in further discussion ? 
*' It is well known that Raghava is righteous, grateful and 
compassionate; that he has become pitiless is due to mine 
396 
SUNDARA KANDA 
evil karma. Will he not deliver me, he who in Janasthana 
destroyed fourteen thousand titans singlehanded ? Even were 
Lanka in the midst of the sea and inaccessible, Raghava's 
arrows would transcend all obstacles. What can prevent the 
valiant Rama from rejoining his beloved wife, who has been 
borne away by a titan ? I fear that the elder brother of 
Lakshmana does not know that I am here, for if he did, that 
warrior would not endure this affront. 
" The King of the Vultures, who would have informed 
Rama of mine abduction, was slain by Ravana in the struggle. 
Great indeed was the courage manifested by Jatayu in coming 
to mine aid and, despite his age, seeking to destroy Ravana. 
Did Raghava know that I was here, this very hour, he would 
rid the world of titans with his flaming shafts ; he would 
burn up Lanka, swallow the ocean and blot out the might of 
Ravana. From each dwelling the groans and cries of the 
female titans, their husbands slain, would have risen, as mine 
do now or even louder, and Rama, aided by Lakshmana 
would range the city, slaughtering the titans, for the foe in stantly yields up his life, who comes face to face with them. 
Then Lanka, its streets tilled with smoke issuing from the 
funeral pyres, encircled by wreaths of vultures, would soon 
resemble a charnel house. Soon shall I be avenged ! This 
matter will cost you all dear, for such inauspicious omens are 
to be seen in Lanka, that she will soon be shorn of her 
splendour. 
The King of the Titans, the vicious Ravana having been 
slain, Lanka, now prosperous and happy, will resemble a 
widow. Assuredly I shall soon hear the wailing of the daughters 
of the titans in every dwelling, mourning in their sorrow. 
Plunged in darkness, deprived of her glory, her valiant titans 
slain, the city of Lanka will perish, consumed by Rama's 
arrows, when that hero, the corners of whose eyes are red, 
learns that I am held captive in the titan's abode. The time 
fixed by that cruel and wicked Ravana is at hand and that 
vicious wretch has resolved to destroy me. To ignore what 
is prohibited, is the practice of these base demons. Terrible 
is the calamity which will follow this outrage; those titans 
who live on flesh are ignorant of virtue. Assuredly that titan 
397 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
intends me for his morning repast ; I am helpless, what can 
I do in the absence of my beloved ? Deprived of my lord's 
presence, stricken with grief, not beholding Rama, the corners 
of whose eyes are red, may I soon see the God Vaivasvata ! 
Nay, the elder brother of Bharata is unaware that I still live, 
else he and Lakshmana would have scoured the earth for me. 
Without doubt, overwhelmed by my foes, that warrior, the 
elder brother of Lakshmana has renounced his body and 
repaired to the Celestial Region. 
Happy are the Gods, Gandharvas, Siddhas and the great 
Rishis who are able to look on the heroic Rama. It may be 
that the sagacious and royal Sage Rama, has been absorbed in 
the Absolute and hath no longer any need of a consort or that 
one who is present inspires joy, but the absent are forgotten. 
Perchance the fault is mine, and I have lost the right to happi ness, I, the lovely Sita, separated from the illustrious Rama. 
Death to me is preferable to life, bereft of that magnanimous 
One, that great hero of imperishable exploits, the destroyer 
of his foes ! It may be that the two brothers, those chiefs of 
men have laid down their arms, they who feed on the roots 
and woodland fruits, passing their lives in the forest or they 
have been put to death through treachery by the vile Ravana, 
the last of the titans. If that be so, then with all my heart 
I long for death nor is it forbidden me in my distress. Blessed 
are those high-souled ascetics who are illumined, their senses 
subdued, for whom there is neither desire nor aversion ; for 
them, neither love nor hate gives rise to joy or pain ; they are 
free ; salutations to those great beings ! Forsaken by the 
beloved Rama, versed in the science of the soul and having 
fallen into the power of the wicked Ravana, I shall yield up 
my life." 
CHAPTER 27 
Trijata's Dream 
These words of Sita roused the female titans to great fury 
and some hurried away to repeat them to that vile creature, 
Ravana. 
398 
SUNDARA KANDA 
Then those monsters of hideous aspect approached her and 
began to threaten her in the same way as before with as little 
success and some said : 
" O Wretched Sita, to-day those demons whose destruction 
thou hast planned, will devour thy flesh at their pleasure." 
Seeing Sita threatened by those vile demons, Trijata, who was 
aged and prudent, said to them : " Ye Wretches, devour me, 
but do not lay hands on Sita, the daughter of Janaka and the 
beloved daughter-in-law of King Dasaratha. Last night, I 
had a terrible dream causing my hair to stand on end, fore telling the overthrow of the titans and the triumph of this 
woman's husband." 
Hearing these words uttered by Trijata, all those titan women, 
filled with ire, terrified, demanded that she should speak 
further, saying : — " Do thou relate the manner of thy dream 
and what thou didst behold last night." 
Hearing those words, falling from the lips of the titan women, 
Trijata began to relate the dream that had come to her in the 
early hours, saying: — 
" I beheld a celestial chariot made of ivory, drawn by a 
hundred swans traversing the ethereal regions in which 
Raghava accompanied by Lakshmana stood clad in dazzling 
raiment, adorned with garlands. And I saw Sita wearing the 
purest white, standing on a snow-white mountain surrounded 
by the sea and she was re-united with Rama, as the light with 
the sun. And again I beheld Raghava seated on a mighty 
elephant possessing four tusks, resembling a hill, as also Laksh mana, whereupon those two lions among heroes, ablaze with 
their own effulgence, approached Janaki arrayed in dazzling 
robes and decked with garlands. Upon this, she mounted 
on the shoulders of an elephant led by her lord, appearing 
in the sky near the summit of that mountain ! Thereafter, 
that lotus-eyed one, rose into the air from her husband's 
embrace and I beheld her wiping the sun and moon with 
her hand. Then that foremost among elephants with those 
two princes and the large-eyed Sita stood over Lanka. 
" And again, in dream, I saw Rama, clothed in brilliant attire, 
wearing garlands, accompanied by Lakshmana, in a chariot 
drawn by eight white bullocks and I beheld that foremost of 
399 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
men, Rama, whose essence is valour with his brother Laksh mana and Sita ascending a celestial flowery car, bright as the 
sun, driving towards the northern regions. 
" Then I saw Ravana, lying on the earth covered in oil, shaven, 
attired in red, garlanded with oleander flowers, intoxicated and 
still drinking. And I beheld him falling from the flowery 
chariot, Pushpaka, on to the earth, shorn, wearing a black cloth, 
dragged hither and thither by a woman. Thereafter I saw 
him seated in a chariot drawn by asses, robed in red, with his 
body stained likewise, quaffing sesamum oil, laughing and 
dancing, his mind confused, his senses clouded, speeding 
toward the south. Again I saw Ravana, the Lord of the 
Titans, stricken with fear, fall headlong on the earth, thereafter 
leaping up suddenly, terrified, bemused with liquor, staggering 
about naked like a madman, incapable of speech yet babbling 
continuously, stinking and foul, resembling hell itself. Then, 
proceeding towards the south, he entered a lake where even 
the mud had dried up and a dark woman clad in red, be smeared with mud, placed a rope round the neck of Dasha griva dragging him to the region of death. 
" There I beheld the mighty Kumbhakarna and all the sons 
of Ravana, their heads shaven, besmeared with oil. Dasha griva riding a boar, Indrajita a porpoise and Kumbhakarna a 
camel ; only Bibishana appeared to me standing in space, 
under a white canopy, accompanied by four ministers. There after a great company of titans wearing red garlands and 
raiment filed past, playing on stringed instruments, dancing 
and drinking. And I beheld the enchanting city of Lanka, 
filled with elephants, chariots and horses, her gateways and 
arches shattered, falling into the sea. And in Lanka, crimson 
with flames, the female titans were laughing and creating a 
terrible clamour, quaffing oil. I saw Kumbhakarna and all 
the other titans, dark-hued, wearing scarlet robes, falling 
headlong into a cesspool. 
" Do ye now depart since Raghava is about to be re-united 
with Sita and, in extreme ire, will exterminate you all with the 
titans. If his beloved and revered consort, who, for his sake, 
followed him to the forest, is threatened and tormented by you, 
Raghava will never brook the insult. Enough therefore of 
400 
SUNDARA KANDA 
these invidious threats, occupy yourselves in consoling her 
and crave her forgiveness ; you should seek to influence Vaidehi 
by persuasion. That unfortunate one, on whose account I 
had so significant a dream, is about to be delivered from 
her woes and re-united to her beloved and illustrious lord once 
more. Even after the menaces you have uttered, let us give up 
all harsh words and implore her forgiveness. In truth, a 
terrible disaster for the titans will proceed from Raghava. 
By casting yourselves at her feet, you may placate Maithili, 
the daughter of Janaka, who is able to preserve us from a 
great calamity. Furthermore, I do not find any blemish in 
that lady of large eyes nor the least defect in any of her limbs. 
Verily I deem the misfortune that has befallen this goddess, 
who does not merit adversity, has no more substance than a 
shadow. 
" I foresee the immediate attainment of Vaidehi's desires, 
the destruction of the King of the Titans and the imminent 
triumph of Raghava. Behold the indications of great joy, 
held in check by that lady, in the twitching of her left eye 
large as a lotus petal and without apparent cause ; the slight 
trembling of the left arm of that virtuous daughter of Videha, 
her left thigh too resembling an elephant's trunk is quivering, 
as if Raghava himself stood before her and the winged crea tures nesting in the branches above her are pouring forth 
their song as if to announce the advent of an auspicious hour." 
Thereupon, that modest and youthful woman, greatly 
delighted at the prospect of her husband's victory, said to 
them : " If this prove true I will be your protector." 
CHAPTER 28 
Site's Lament 
Hearing the harsh speech of that King of the Titans, Ravana, 
the unfortunate Sita began to tremble, as a she-elephant 
attacked by a lion on the edge of the forest, 
401 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Threatened by Ravana and encircled by the titans, that 
timid damsel gave way to despair like a young girl abandoned 
in a wood. 
She reflected : " The sages affirm truly that death does not 
come before the appointed hour since, worthless creature that 
I am, I still live after these insults. Bereft of happiness, 
rilled with misery, my heart must be hard indeed that it does 
not break into a hundred pieces this day, like the crest of a 
mountain struck by lightning. Nay, I am not to blame for this 
— I may be slain by that dreadful monster but I can no more 
give him my affection than a brahmin can impart the teachings 
of the Veda to one of low caste. If that Lord of the Worlds 
does not appear at the appointed hour, that vile King of the 
Titans will cut me to pieces with his sharp weapons as a sur- 
geon cuts the foetus from the heart of its mother. Two 
months will quickly pass away and I shall have to suffer the 
pain of death, unhappy creature that I am, like a thief, who 
having disobeyed his sovereign is bound and being led to 
execution when the night is over. 
" O Rama, O Lakshmana, O Sumitra ! O Mother of Rama ! 
O My Mothers ! I am about to perish miserably as a ship 
foundering in the sea battered by the storm. Assuredly those 
two valiant princes must have fallen under the blows of that 
creature disguised as a deer, like a bull or lion struck by light ning. There is no doubt that it was fate in the form of a 
deer that deluded me, unfortunate creature that I am and in 
my folly I sent those two princes, Rama and Lakshmana to 
capture it. Alas ! O Rama, O Thou of truthful vows and 
long arms ! O Thou, whose countenance shines like the full 
moon ! O My Life, thou, the benefactor and friend of all 
beings, art not aware that I am about to be put to death by 
the titans. For me, who have no other God than my lord, 
my patience, my sleeping on the bare ground, my observance 
of duty, my devotion to my husband have all been in vain, 
as a service rendered to one who is ungrateful. Vain has it 
been, that I have fulfilled my duty and that I am wholly 
devoted to thee alone since I do not behold thee and in thine 
absence, wasting away, pale and weak, have given up all hope 
of being re-united with thee. Having courageously carried out 
402 
SUNDARA KANDA 
the behests of thy sire, having fulfilled thy vow, returning 
from the forest, thou shalt sport with many large-eyed ladies 
in peace. O Rama, I, who conceived a lasting love for thee, 
to mine own destruction was wholly attached to thee ; having 
practised asceticism and observed my vows, I am about to lose 
my life, woe unto me, unfortunate wretch that I am ! Gladly 
would I take my life by means of poison or by sharp weapons 
but there is none who will bring them to me in this city of 
the titans." 
Overcome by sorrow, reflecting for a long time, Sita undid 
the cord that tied her hair, saying : — " I shall hang myself with 
this cord and reach the abode of death." 
Then the lovely Sita, whose form was full of grace, took hold 
of a branch of the tree under which she stood and became 
absorbed in the thought of Rama, Lakshmana and her kinsfolk; 
and many auspicious signs removing her grief and lending 
her courage, well-known in the world, appeared to her, in dicating the advent of future well-being. 
chapter 29 
Sita observes auspicious Portents 
Whilst the irreproachable and lovely princess remained 
bereft of joy and full of anxiety, she beheld auspicious portents 
on every side, resembling willing servants attendant on a 
wealthy man. And the large left eye of that lady of lovely 
looks, with its dark pupil, began to twitch like a lotus set spinning 
by a fish. And her beautiful plump and rounded arm, sprinkled 
with sandal and aloes which ere this, had served her lord 
as a pillow, began to tremble again and again. Her left thigh, 
like unto the tapering trunk of an elephant, moved convul sively foretelling that she would soon behold Rama and the 
golden sari, now covered with dust, of the large-eyed Maithili, 
whose teeth were like the seeds of a pomegranate, slipped from 
her beautiful shoulders. 
4°3 2D 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Comforted by these signs and others also, that foretold a 
happy ending, Sita of lovely lashes resembling a plant dried 
by the wind and sun, reviving under tardy rain, experienced 
a great felicity. Then her countenance, her lips like Bimba 
fruit, her beautiful eyes, the curve of her lashes and her sharp 
teeth, recovered their beauty once more as the moon issuing 
from the mouth of Rahu. 
Her despair and exhaustion removed, her fever allayed, her 
grief was assuaged and her heart filled with joy and that noble 
lady looked as beautiful as the moon of cool rays in its waxing 
period. 
CHAPTER 30 • 
Hanumari's Reflections 
The valiant Hanuman who had heard all that Sita, Trijata 
and the titans had said, gazed on that illustrious damsel who 
resembled a celestial being from the Nandana Gardens and 
many thoughts flitted through the mind of that monkey. 
He reflected : " She, who was sought in every place by 
thousands and millions of monkeys, is here and it is I who 
have found her. Engaged as a skilful spy to discover the 
strength of the enemy I have stolen into the city and know 
everything concerning the might of Ravana and the resources 
of the titans as also of their capital. It is for me to console the 
consort of that immeasurably illustrious prince, who is com passionate to all beings, for she is pining for her lord. I shall 
seek to gain the confidence of this lady, whose countenance 
resembles the full moon, who formerly was unacquainted with 
suffering and who cannot see any end to her woes. If I return, 
without having comforted that virtuous lady whose soul is 
overwhelmed with grief, my journey will have been in vain. 
In sooth, when I have departed, that illustrious Princess Janaki, 
giving up all hope of deliverance, will yield up her life and that 
long-armed warrior, whose countenance resembles the full 
moon, anxious to behold Sita is equally worthy of consolation. 
404 
SUNDARA KANDA 
To speak to her in the presence of these titans is impossible, 
what then shall I do ? I am in a great dilemna. If I do not 
give her some reassurance in the last hour of the night, she 
will undoubtedly give up her life and if Rama enquires of me, 
* What did Sita of slender waist say ? ' what answer can I give 
to him if I have had no converse with her ? If I return without 
having achieved my purpose regarding Sita, Kakutstha will 
consume me with his fiery glance, then it were vain to urge 
my master to take action for Rama's sake, by placing himself 
at the head of his forces. 
" I shall take the first opportunity offered by these titan 
women to reassure that sorely tried lady, yet in this insigni ficant form and monkey shape, if I assume a human voice and 
speak in sanskrita like a sage, Sita will deem me to be Ravana 
and she will be terrified ! It is essential however that I express 
myself in the human tongue, how otherwise can I inspire this 
irreproachable lady with courage ? Seeing my shape and hear ing me speak, Janaki, who has been terrorised by the titans, 
will be seized with an even greater fear and that illustrious 
and large-eyed Sita will cry out, imagining me to be Ravana, 
who is able to change his form at will. 
" Hearing her cry, the whole company of titans, armed with 
every kind of weapon, will form themselves into a great mass 
resembling death itself and, hideous and indomitable, will 
rush on me from every side and seek to destroy me or take me 
captive. Then, beholding me leap from branch to branch 
and climb to the tops of the highest trees, they will become 
exceedingly alarmed and will fill the woods with their wild 
cries ; thereafter they will call the titans who are engaged in 
guarding the king's palace to their aid and, on account of their 
native excitability, will seize hold of every kind of weapon, 
spears, darts, and swords and hasten to join in the fray. 
Surrounded by them on all sides, if I slay that host of titans, 
exhausted, I shall be unable to cross the ocean or they, out numbering me, will succeed in capturing me and, being a 
prisoner, that lady will reap no benefit from my attempt. 
" Alternatively, in their passion for evil doing, they may 
even slay the daughter of Janaka, which will completely defeat 
the great design of Rama and Sugriva E Janaki dwells in an 
405 
THE RAMAYAXA OF VALMIKI 
inaccessible and secret place surrounded by the sea, guarded 
on all sides by the titans with all its approaches closed. If I 
am slain or captured by the titans in combat, I know of no 
other monkey who can cross the four hundred miles of sea. 
Even if I destroy thousands of titans, I should not then be 
able to reach the other shore of the vast ocean. Battles are 
hazardous and I do not like to engage in so uncertain an enter prise ; what wise person would take any risk in a matter of 
trust ? It would be a great error to frighten Vaidehi by address ing her, yet if I do not do so, she will surely perish. Under takings often fail through an incompetent messenger unable to 
take advantage of time and place, as darkness is overcome by 
the rising sun ; in such cases, whether it concerns the accom plishment or avoidance of any matter, the most widely planned 
projects do not succeed. Assuredly a presumptuous messenger 
ruins all ! How shall I act therefore, so that my mission does not 
prove vain ? How shall I show myself equal to this charge ? 
How shall the crossing of the ocean not prove to have been use less ? How can I persuade Sita to listen to me without inspiring 
fear in her ? " 
Having put all these questions to himself, Hanuman formed 
the following resolution : 
" I shall speak to her of Rama of immortal exploits, for then 
his dear consort will not be afraid of me since she is wholly 
absorbed in the thought of her lord. In a gentle voice, utter ing the name of Rama, the foremost of the Ikshwakus of subdued 
soul and, lauding his piety and renown in sweet accents, I 
shall induce Sita to listen to me. There is nothing I will not 
do to inspire her with confidence." 
Thereupon, the mighty Hanuman, looking down on the 
consort of the Lord of the World from the branches of the 
tree where he sat concealed, spoke to her in melodious and 
candid tones. 
CHAPTER 31 
Hanuman praises Rama 
Having examined the matter from every aspect, that intelligent 
monkey began to pour sweet words into Vaidehi's ear, saying : — 
406 
SUNDARA KANDA 
"There was a king named Dasaratha, the possessor of 
chariots, horses and elephants, one by nature devout and 
illustrious, the glory of the Ikshwakus. To harm none was 
his delight and he was high-minded and compassionate, a 
true hero of his race that found its splendour and the growth 
of its prosperity in him. Clad in all the insignia of royalty 
and majesty, that lion among kings, renowned in the four 
regions, shed the felicity he enjoyed over all. His beloved 
eldest son, whose countenance was as bright as the moon, 
was called Rama, possessor of a keen intellect and the most 
skilled of archers. Faithful to his vows, the defender of his 
people, the protector of all beings, upholder of justice, he was 
the scourge of his foes. 
" At the command of his aged sire, his word his bond, that 
hero accompanied by his consort and his brother was banished 
to the forest. Whilst giving himself up to the chase in that 
vast solitude, he slew large numbers of valiant titans who 
were able to change their form at will. 
When Ravana learnt that he had destroyed Janasthana and 
killed Khara and Dushana, he in fury, bore Janaki away, having 
lured her lord far into the forest by the aid of Maricha in the 
form of a deer. 
" Whilst searching everywhere to discover the divine and 
irreproachable Sita, Rama found a friend in the forest, the 
Monkey Sugriva, Bringing about the destruction of Bali, 
Rama, the conqueror of hostile cities, conferred the monkey 
kingdom on the magnanimous Sugriva and by his decree, 
thousands of monkeys, able to change their form at will, set 
out to search for that goddess in every region. I am one of 
those who, at the instance of Sampati, crossed the sea four 
hundred miles in width, on account of that large-eyed beauty. 
Hearing of her comeliness, her grace and distinguishing 
characteristics from Rama, I have been enabled to findherat last." 
Having spoken thus, that bull among monkeys fell silent. 
And Janaki was extremely astonished, hearing that speech 
and brushing aside her lovely tangled locks which concealed 
her face, she looked up into the Shingshapa tree. 
Hearing the words of that monkey, Sita glanced enquiringly 
to the four quarters and other regions, whilst an extreme delight 
407 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
flooded her whole being as she remembered Rama. Then, 
glancing from side to side and up and down, she espied the 
son of Vata, who resembled the rising sun, that minister of the 
King of the Monkeys of incomparable wisdom. 
CHAPTER 32 
Sita sees Hanuman 
Beholding that monkey of pleasing speech, clad in white 
raiment, resembling a flash of lightning, crouching concealed 
among the branches, bright as a cluster of Ashoka flowers 
and like gold refined in the crucible, Sita was greatly agitated. 
Observing that foremost of monkeys of humble mien, 
Maithili said to herself in extreme surprise: "Ah! What a 
terrible looking monkey, unacceptable and hideous to behold." 
Thinking thus, her fears increased and she broke into counriess 
plaintive lamentations. Then the lovely Sita cried out in her 
terror : " O Rama, O Rama, O Lakshmana ! " and the voice 
of that virtuous princess grew fainter and fainter till, casting 
her eyes on that excellent monkey once more, who had assumed 
a reverent attitude, Maithili said to herself : " It must be a 
dream." 
Observing the face of that Indra among Monkeys with its 
deep scars as has been described and, looking on that excellent 
ape, the most honourable son of the Wind, the first of the 
wise, Sita lost consciousness and became like one dead. There after, slowly regaining her senses, she said to herself : " This 
vision of a monkey is condemned by the scriptures and is an 
inauspicious dream! Can all be well with Rama, who is accom panied by Lakshmana and my father King Janaka ? Yet it 
can be no dream for, in the grief and misfortune that over whelms me, I am no longer able to sleep and, far from him 
whose countenance resembles the full moon, no joy remains 
for me. Through constantly thinking and calling on Rama, 
I imagine I hear and see only those things which are related 
to Rama. For my love is a torment, my whole being flows 
408 
SUNDARA KANDA 
towards him, ever absorbed in his rememberance I see and 
hear him alone. Is it an illusion ? This is what perturbs me 
and makes me uneasy. I deem this to be but a phantom of 
the mind yet thinking thus, I still behold it, while an imaginary 
object can never have a form and he who is thus addressing 
me has a distinct form. Salutations to Vachaspati who is 
accompanied by the God who bears the Thunderbolt ! Saluta tions to Swyambhu and the God who partakes of offerings! 
May they grant that the creature who has spoken in my presence, 
be real and not illusory ! " 
chapter 33 
Hanuman's Converse with the Princess Sita 
Slipping down from the. tree, Hanuman, whose face was the 
colour of coral, attired in a humble guise, approached Sita 
and that mighty son of the Wind with joined palms addressed 
her in gentle tones, saying : 
" Who art thou, O Lady, whose eyes resemble lotus 
petals, who, wearing a soiled silken garment art supporting 
thyself by the branch of the tree ? O Irreproachable One, 
why are tears of suffering falling from thine eyes, that resemble 
the lotus, as water flows from a broken vessel ? O Fair One, 
who art thou among the Celestials, Titans, Nagas, Gandharvas, 
Rakshas, Yakshas and Kinneras ? Or do the Rudras claim that 
thou art born of them or the Wind-gods or the Vasus, O Lady 
of exquisite features ? To me thou appearest to be of divine 
origin. Art thou Rohini, foremost and most brilliant of stars, 
who, separated from the moon has fallen from the abode of 
the immortals ? Or art thou the lovely dark-eyed Arundhati, 
who hath fled in wrath or in pride from her lord, Snri Vasishtha? 
Is it for a son, a father, a brother or a husband, whose departure 
from this world thou art mourning, O Lady of slender waist ? 
By thy tears and sighs and thy lying on the earth, it seems 
to me that thou art not a celestial being and further thou dost 
ever and again call on the name of a king. From the marks on 
409 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
thy person I deem thee to be the consort or the daughter of a 
monarch. Art thou not Sita, who was ruthlessly borne away 
by Ravana from Janasthana ? May prosperity attend thee ! 
From thy wretched plight, thine unrivalled beauty and thine 
ascetic garb, I deem thee to be Rama's consort." 
Hearing Hanuman's words and filled with joy at the sound 
of Rama's name, Vaidehi answered him, as he stood beneath the 
tree, saying : 
" I am the daughter-in-law of Dasaratha, foremost among 
the kings of the world, a knower of the Self, the destroyer of 
hostile armies. I am the daughter of King Janaka, the 
magnanimous sovereign of Videha and my name is Sita, the 
consort of the highly intelligent Rama, who is endowed with 
wisdom. For twelve years I dwelt in Raghava's abode, 
experiencing every earthly delight and satisfying every desire. 
In the thirteenth year, the king, with the approval of his ministers, 
resolved to install Rama, the joy of the House of Ikshwaku 
on the throne. As they were preparing to anoint Rama as 
heir-apparent, Queen Kaikeyi addressed her lord, saying : — 
" ' I will neither eat nor drink of that which is served to me 
each day but shall put an end to my existence if Rama be 
installed. Let the boons that, in gratitude, thou didst grant 
me, be redeemed and let Raghava repair to the forest '. 
" The king, faithful to his bond, recollected the boons 
made to the queen and hearing those cruel and unpleasing 
words was lost in grief. Then that aged monarch, adhering 
firmly to his vow, weeping, besought his eldest son to renounce 
the throne. That illustrious prince to whom the words of his 
sire were more to be prized than the throne, inwardly assenting, 
promised to obey. Rama, ever a giver, seeking no return, 
truthful, never uttering a falsehood even were his life to be 
made forfeit, is essentially brave. Laying aside his costly 
attire, the highly glorious Rama with his whole heart, re nounced the kingdom and gave me into his mother's keeping, 
but I, assuming the garb of an ascetic, quickly prepared to 
accompany him to the forest, for, separated from him, I could 
not bear to dwell even in the celestial regions. Then the 
fortunate Saumitri, the enhancer of his friends' delight, donning 
robes of bark and kusha grass also prepared to follow his 
410 
SUNDARA KANDA 
elder brother. In deference to the will of our sovereign, firm 
in our vows, we entered the dark and unknown forest. While 
that one of immeasurable effulgence was dwelling in the 
Dandaka Forest, I, his consort, was carried away by the Titan, 
Ravana of perverse soul. Two months is the time fixed by 
him, after which I am to die." 
CHAPTER 34 
Sita's Uncertainty on seeing Hanuman 
Hearing the words of Sita, who was stricken with grief, 
Hanuman, the foremost among monkeys, in order to reassure 
her, said : — 
" O Divine Vaidehi, by Rama's decree I have come as a 
messenger to thee ; he is safe and enquires as to thy welfare. 
Rama, the son of Dasaratha, who is versed in the Veda, con versant with the use of the Brahmastra, the foremost of the 
learned, offers salutations to thee, O Queen ! The highly 
resplendent Lakshmana too, the most powerful and cherished 
companion of thy lord, in the midst of his burning anxieties, 
bows before thee and wishes thee well." 
Hearing of the welfare of those two lions among men, Sita, 
trembling with delight, said to Hanuman : — " Verily the wise 
say that happiness visits a man even if it be at the end of a 
hundred years." 
Thereupon Sita and Hanuman began to converse with 
delight and mutual confidence. Hearing Sita speak in this 
wise, Hanuman, the son of Maruta drew nearer to her who 
had been overwhelmed with grief and, as he did so, she grew 
apprehensive and reflected : — "Alas ! Why have I entered into 
converse with him ? It is Ravana in another guise ! " There upon, letting go the Ashoka branch, Maithili of faultless limbs, 
exhausted with suffering, sank down on the earth. 
Then that long-armed monkey bowed unto Janaka's daughter, 
who, rilled with terror, did not dare raise her eyes to him, yet, 
411 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
seeing him bowing humbly before her, Sita, whose face re sembled the moon, sighed deeply and said to him in gentle 
accents : — 
" If thou art Ravana's self, who has assumed a perfidious 
guise in order to increase my distress, it is a vile act. Thou 
art he, who, renouncing his own shape, appeared to me in 
Janasthana as a mendicant, O Ranger of the Night. O Thou, 
wearing shapes at will, it doth not behove thee to torment me, 
who am distressed and emaciated with fasting. 
" Yet thou canst not be he whom I fear, since my heart 
feels delight in seeing thee. If thou art truly Rama's messenger, 
may good betide thee ! Thou art welcome, O Best of Monkeys 
for it is sweet to me to hear of Rama. Set forth the virtues of 
Rama, O Monkey, and ravish my soul, O Gentle One, as the 
current of a river bears away its banks. O how sweet a dream 
does an inhabitant of the woods bring to me so long after 
mine abduction ! If I might only see the valiant Raghava 
accompanied by Lakshmana once more but even a dream 
denies me this delight. Can it be a dream ? To see a monkey 
in dream does not give rise to happiness yet I am happy now ! 
Is my mind not deranged or has fasting disturbed the humours 
of my body and caused this delusion or is it perchance a 
mirage ? Nay, it cannot be an hallucination for I am in full 
possession of my senses and perceive this monkey clearly." 
Such were the thoughts that haunted Sita, as also that the 
titans were able to change their form at will, which convinced 
her that this was the King of the Titans himself. Having 
arrived at this conclusion, the daughter of Janaka, of slender 
waist, ceased to converse with the monkey but Hanuman, 
divining what was passing through her mind, consoled her 
with sweet words, enhancing her delight saying: — 
" Bright as the sun and like the moon, beloved of all, that 
sovereign of the world is as munificent as Kuvera. In valour 
resembling the glorious Vishnu, of sweet and truthful speech 
like unto Vachaspati, handsome, illustrious and fortunate 
like the God of Love, the just dispenser of punishment to 
evil-doers, he is the foremost of car-warriors in the world. 
" He in whose arms the whole world takes refuge, that 
magnanimous Raghava was lured away from the hermitage 
412 
SUNDARA KANDA 
by means of Maricha in the form of a deer, thus allowing 
Havana to bear thee away. Soon shall that mighty hero 
destroy Havana in combat with his fiery shafts discharged in 
anger. It is he, who has sent me with these tidings. Worn 
with grief at thy separation, he enquires as to thy welfare, as 
also the highly resplendent Lakshmana, enhancer of Sumitra's 
delight, who offers salutations to thee. The king of the 
monkey hosts, Sugriva by name, who is Rama's friend, also 
pays homage to thee; Rama, Lakshmana and Sugriva have 
thee ever in mind ; though subject to the titans, by good 
fortune thou dost still live, O Vaidehi. Ere long thou shalt 
behold Rama and Lakshmana of the great car with Sugriva 
of Umitless prowess. 
"I am Sugriva's minister, the monkey Hanuman, I have 
entered the city of Lanka, having crossed the ocean, thus 
setting my foot on the head of Ravana of perverse soul. I 
have come here to see thee, depending on my own prowess, 
I am not he whom thou deemest me to be. Do thou renounce 
thy doubts, and have confidence in my words." 
chapter 35 
Hanuman makes himself known to Sita 
Hearing that lion among monkeys discoursing on Rama, 
Vaidehi spoke to him in sweet and gentle accents, saying : — 
" Where didst thou encounter Rama and how didst thou 
come to know Lakshmana ? How did men and monkeys come 
to form an alliance ? O Monkey, describe the distinctive 
characteristics of Rama and Lakshmana once again and so 
dispel my grief. Speak to me of Rama's grace and form, 
his arms and thighs, as well as Lakshmana's." 
To these questions of Vaidehi, Hanuman, born of Maruta, 
began to give a detailed description of Rama and said : — 
" By good fortune, recognising me to be a messenger of 
Rama, O Vaidehi, whose eyes are as large as lotus petals, thou 
hast asked me to describe the person of thy lord as well as that 
413 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
of Lakshmana. O Large-eyed Lady, hear me while I tell 
thee of those marks of royalty I have observed in the persons 
of Rama and Lakshmana. O Daughter of Janaka, Rama has 
eyes like unto lotus petals, his countenance resembles the 
moon and he is endowed with great beauty and virtue. In 
radiance like the sun, in patience resembling the earth, in 
wisdom like unto Brihaspati, in renown equal to Vasava, he is 
the protector of all beings and the upholder of his race, the 
guardian of law and tradition and the scourge of his foes. 
O Lovely One, Rama is the preserver of the people and the 
four castes, he inaugurates and establishes the social order, 
he is worshipped by all like the sun and is an observer of pious 
vows ; he knows well the proper time to pay honour to holy 
men and is conversant with the path of right action. 
" Born with royal prerogatives, the servant of the brahmins, 
learned, endowed with nobility, humble, he is the scourge of 
his foes. Versed in the Yajur Veda, honoured by those con versant with the Vedas, he is proficient in archery and possesses 
a thorough knowledge of the Vedas and Vedangas. Broad 
shouldered, long-armed, handsome, possessing a conch-shaped 
neck his ribs are well covered and muscular and his 
eyes are red ; such is Rama renowned among men. The 
tone of his voice resembles the Dundubhi, his skin is smooth, 
his three limbs, thigh, fist and wrist are hard, and the others, 
long, his navel, abdomen and breast are well-proportioned 
and high. The rims of his eyes, his nails and palms are red, 
his voice and gait grave ; there are three folds in the skin 
of his body and neck ; the lines on the soles of his feet and 
breast are deep; his neck, back and thighs are muscular; 
his hair is coiled in three circles ; his thumb is marked with 
four lines indicating his deep knowledge of the Vedas ; there 
are four lines on his forehead, the sign of a long life ; he is 
four cubits in height ; his arms, thighs and cheeks are plump ; 
wrists, knee-joints, hips, hands and feet are well-proportioned, 
his four front teeth have auspicious marks ; his gait is like a 
lion's, a tiger's, an elephant's or a bull's ; his lips and jaws 
are fleshy, his nose long, his face, speech, down and skin, 
cool; his two arms, little fingers, thighs and legs, slender; 
his countenance, eyes, mouth, tongue, lips, palate, breast, 
414 
SUNDARA KANDA 
nails and feet resemble lotuses ; his forehead, neck, arms, 
navel, feet, back and ears are ample. He is gifted with grace, 
renown, and radiance ; his lineage is pure on both sides ; 
his armpits, abdomen, breast, nose, shoulders and forehead 
are elevated ; his fingers, hair, down, nails, skin, eyesight and 
intellect, clear and sharp. Raghava delights in what is just 
and true, he is filled with energy and is well able to judge how 
to act under all circumstances ; he is benevolent to all. 
" His brother Saumitri, whose mother is second in rank 
among the queens, whose glory is immeasurable, resembles 
him in beauty, devotion and good qualities ; he is of a golden 
complexion whereas Rama is dark of hue. Those two tigers 
among men, who yearn to see thee once more, scouring the 
earth for thee, met with us in the forest. Ranging the earth 
in search of thee they beheld the King of the Monkeys, who 
had been banished by his elder brother, at the foot of the 
Rishyamuka Mountain that is covered by innumerable trees. 
We were in attendance on the handsome Sugriva, Lord of the 
Monkeys, who had been driven from the kingdom by his elder 
brother and, beholding those foremost of men, clad in bark, 
bearing splendid bows in their hands, that monkey fled to the 
summit of the mountain, distracted with terror. Thereafter 
he sent me out to meet them in all haste and, at Sugriva's 
command, I approached those two princes, those lions among 
men, with joined palms. 
" Distinguished by their handsome features, those two 
heroes, being informed of what had taken place, were well 
pleased and I, placing them on my shoulders, transported 
them to the crest of the hill where the magnanimous Sugriva 
was to be found. There I related all to Sugriva and they 
conversed together and a great friendship grew up between those 
illustrious persons, the King of the Monkeys, and those 
monarchs among men. Then they comforted each other, 
narrating their respective misfortunes and Lakshmana's elder 
brother consoled Sugriva who had been banished by Bah' of 
great prowess on account of the love of a woman. Thereafter, 
Lakshmana related the suffering and loss that had befallen 
Rama to Sugriva, who, hearing this recital from his lips, was 
bereft of his radiance like the sun under eclipse. Then 
415 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
gathering together all the ornaments that thou didst let fall on 
the earth when the Titan bore thee away, the monkeys brought 
them to Rama with delight, but they were ignorant of where 
thou wert. 
" All those ornaments which had fallen tinkling to the ground, 
and had been collected by me, I gave over to Rama, who 
was beside himself with grief and, clasping them to his breast, 
that God of divine beauty, the son of Dasaratha, inflamed with 
grief, with many groans bewailed his loss. For a long time 
that magnanimous hero lay crushed under the weight of his 
affliction and I addressed many words of comfort to him, 
persuading him to rise. Whereupon Rama with Saumitri, 
gazing again and again on those precious objects, gave them 
over to Sugriva. In thine absence, O Noble Lady, Raghava 
is consumed with grief, like a volcano burning with perpetual 
fire. On account of thee, sleeplessness, sorrow and care 
consume the magnanimous Rama, as the sacred fires burn 
down a temple in which they are enclosed. The pain of 
thy separation has shattered him as a violent earthquake 
shatters a great mountain. O Daughter of a King, he wanders 
among the enchanting woods, on river banks and by the side 
of waterfalls but nowhere finds delight. O Daughter of 
Janaka, ere long, Ramachandra will undoubtedly bring about 
the destruction of Ravana with all his kith and kin, and that 
foremost of men will soon liberate thee. 
" It was thus that Rama and Sugriva entered into a friendly 
alliance to encompass Bali's destruction and institute a search 
for thee. Thereupon, returning to Kishkindha with those two 
heroic princes, that lord of monkeys slew Bali in battle and 
having struck him down by his prowess in fight, Rama made 
Sugriva king of all the monkeys and bears. Such was the 
alliance between Rama and Sugriva, 0 Goddess, know then 
that I am Hanuman who have come as their deputy. When 
he had recovered his kingdom, Sugriva, gathering all the 
great and powerful monkeys together, sent them forth to every 
region to seek for thee. Under the commands of their king, 
Sugriva, those mighty monkeys, equal to the Indra of Moun tains, scoured the land on every side. Since that time, in 
fear of Sugriva, those monkeys have been exploring the whole 
416 
SUNDARA KANDA 
earth ; I am one of those. The mighty and illustrious son 
of Bali, Angada by name, set out with a third part of the army 
under him ; many were the days and nights we spent over whelmed with distress, having lost our way on the foremost of 
mountains, Vindhya. Despairing of accomplishing our pur pose and the time appointed having passed, in fear of that 
lord of the monkeys, we resolved to give up our lives. Having 
searched the mountains and the inaccessible fastnesses, the 
rivers and waterfalls without finding any trace of thee, we made 
up our minds to die. Thereafter we began our final fast on 
the summit of the mountain. 
" Submerged in an ocean of grief, Angada lamented un ceasingly, reflecting on thine abduction, O Vaidehi, on the 
death of Bali, on our resolution to die of hunger and on the 
death of Jatayu. Whilst we were fasting thus, waiting for death, 
having given up all hope of carrying out the behests of our 
lord, to the good fortune of our enterprise, there appeared, 
a mighty vulture, the brother of Jatayu, by name Sampati. 
Hearing of his brother's death, he cried out in anger : — 
" * By whom was my younger brother slain and where does 
he dwell ? I wish to hear this from you, O Excellent Monkeys ! ' 
" Thereupon, Angada related all in detail to him and how 
that Titan of terrible form destroyed Jatayu on thine account 
in Janasthana. In his grief for Jatayu's death, that son of 
Aruna told us that thou wast to be found in Havana's abode, 
O Exquisite Damsel ! 
" Hearing the words of Sampati, our joy was extreme and 
led by him we all rose up and, leaving the Vindhya Mountain 
came to the shores of the sea. There a cruel anxiety seized 
the monkeys anew, eager as they were to find thee, but I was 
able to dispel that sharp anguish of the monkey host, who 
beholding the main had lost heart. Then, removing their 
fear I leapt a hundred leagues over the sea and entered Lanka 
by night, which was filled with titans; there I beheld Ravana 
and saw thee overcome with grief, O Irreproachable Lady ! 
" Now I have told thee all, do thou, in thy turn speak to me, 
O Goddess ! I am the messenger of the son of Dasaratha and 
have come here to thee, to carry out Rama's purpose. Know 
me to be Sugriva's minister and the Wind-god's son ! All 
417 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
is well with thy lord, Kakutstha, the foremost of those bearing 
weapons, as also with Lakshmana possessed of auspicious 
marks and ever engaged in the worship of his superiors and 
the well-being of his lord. 
" I have come here at Sugriva's command and have accom plished the journey alone. Changing my form at will, I have 
scoured the southern region and, in my eagerness to find thee, 
have sought thee on every side. With tidings of thee, I shall 
by divine grace be able to dispel the grief of the monkey 
host, who have been lamenting on thy account and my cross ing the ocean will not have been in vain. I shall win renown 
for having found thee, O Goddess and the highly powerful 
Raghava will rejoin thee without delay, having first slain 
Ravana, the king of the Titans with his sons and relatives. 
" Mount Malyavat is the highest of mountains, O Vaidehi, 
and there dwells my sire, Kesarin. Obedient to the will of the 
divine Sages, he once repaired to Gokarna and at that sacred 
spot belonging to the Lord of the Rivers, brought about the 
destruction of the Titan, Samvasadana. I was born of the 
consort of Kesarin, O Maithili and my name is Hanuman ; 
I am known throughout the world for my exploits. To inspire 
thee with confidence, I have described the virtues of thy lord. 
Ere long, O Goddess, Raghava will certainly take thee hence." 
Reassured by the proofs given to her, Sita, exhausted by 
suffering, recognised Hanuman to be Rama's messenger. 
Then Janaki, in an excess of joy, allowed tears of felicity to 
fall from her eyes fringed with dark lashes. The gentle counten ance of that large-eyed damsel with her reddened eyes shone 
like the moon released from Rahu's hold. 
Taking him for a real monkey at last, she reflected in herself; 
" How could it be otherwise ? " 
Then Hanuman again addressed that lady of charming mien, 
saying: — 
" I have told thee all, now have confidence in me, O Maithili! 
What more can I do for thee and what is thy pleasure, ere I 
return? When the Asura, Samvasadana was destroyed in 
combat by the foremost of monkeys at the behest of the celestial 
sages, I was born of Vayu, O Maithili, and though a monkey, 
I am his equal in prowess ! " 
418 
SUNDARA KANDA 
CHAPTER 36 
Sita questions Hanuman 
The exceedingly mighty son of Pavana, Hanuman, in order 
to increase Sita's confidence in him, again addressed her in re assuring words, saying : — 
" O Fortunate One, I am a monkey, the messenger of the 
sagacious Rama ; behold this precious ring on which his name 
is engraved ! O Goddess, it was given to me by that magnani mous hero so that thou shouldst have faith in me. Take heart 
therefore, may good betide thee ! Soon shall there be an end 
to thy grief! " 
Then Janata, taking the jewel that had adorned the finger 
of her lord, was overcome with joy, as if he himself were 
present. Her gentle countenance with its large eyes began to 
sparkle with delight resembling the moon released from 
Rami's hold. Blushing with pleasure on receiving this token 
from her lord, that youthful woman, in her satisfaction, began 
to look on that great monkey as on a friend and paid tribute 
to him in the following wise : — 
" O Foremost of Monkeys, verily thou who have entered this 
city of Ravana's alone, art full of courage, valour and address. 
With admirable tenacity thou hast traversed the ocean, 
four hundred miles in breadth, the abode of great monsters, 
reducing it to the measure of a cow's hoof. I do not look 
on thee as an ordinary monkey, O Lion among Forest Dwellers, 
since thou dost not stand in awe of Ravana. O Best of 
Monkeys, thou hast merited associationship with me, since 
Rama the knower of Self has dispatched thee as his messenger. 
It is certain that the invincible Rama would never have sent 
thee to me without first testing thy prowess. By good fortune 
the virtuous and truthful Rama as also the illustrious Laksh mana, enhancer of Sumitra's delight, are well, yet if Kakutstha 
live untouched by ill, how is it that he does not burn up the 
419 26 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
earth encircled by the sea in his wrath like the fires at the dis solution of the worlds ? Those two heroes are able to subdue 
the Gods themselves and yet they retrain from action ; I deem 
therefore that my sufferings are still not at an end ! Is Rama 
not disquieted ; is he not torn with anxiety on my account ? 
Is that son of a king making every preparation to deliver me ? 
Is he sorrowful and pre-occupied ? Has he lost sight of his 
ultimate purpose ; is he fulfilling his duty with fortitude ? Is 
that slayer of his foes, desirous of victory, propitiating his 
friends with forbearance and gifts and employing the three fold means of dealing with his enemies ? Does he show good will to his friends and have they confidence in him ? Does he 
ally himself with those of good repute and do they pay him 
honour ? Does that son of a king seek the favour of the Gods; 
does he depend on them for his power and fortune ? Has 
Rama's affection for me decreased as a result of my living far 
from him ? Will he deliver me from this peril ? Is he not 
unstrung by this extreme misfortune, being accustomed to 
felicity and unused to adversity? Has he received frequent good 
tidings of Kaushalya, Sumitra and also Bharata? Is not 
Raghava, worthy of honour, overcome with grief at my 
absence ? Is he reflecting on how he may rescue me ? Will not 
Bharata, ever devoted to his brother, send out a great army 
led by experienced generals for my sake? O Foremost of 
Monkeys, will not the King of the Monkeys, the fortunate 
Sugriva, come to mine aid at the head of a host of valiant 
monkeys using their teeth and nails ? Will not the heroic 
Lakshmana, the increaser of Sumitra's delight, skilled in the 
use of weapons, destroy the titans with his shafts ? Shall I 
not see Rama strike down Ravana on the battlefield ere long 
with his friends and kinsfolk by means of Rudra's weapon ? 
Is the golden countenance of Raghava, fragrant with the scent 
of lotuses, not dimmed under adversity, like a lotus deprived 
of water under the burning sun? Does he still retain his 
fixity of purpose, he who, for the sake of righteousness, with out regret renounced the throne and on foot entered the 
forest with me ? Neither for his mother nor his father nor for 
any other does he bear the love that he cherishes for me. 
I shall only live as long as I hear of him," 
430 
SUNDARA KANDA 
Having addressed these words, full of meaning and sweetness 
to that monkey, that charming lady became silent so that she 
might hear more of her lord. 
And listening to Sita, Maruti, of immeasurable prowess, 
with joined palms paid obeisance to her and spoke again, 
saying: 
" O Illustrious Princess, the lotus-eyed Rama does not 
know that thou art here and for this reason has not delivered 
thee as Purandara rescued Sachi. Learning this from me, 
Raghava will instantly come hither with his great army of 
bears and monkeys and, having triumphed over the invincible 
ocean, the abode of Varuna with his terrible shafts, Kakutstha 
will rid the city of Lanka of all the titans. Even if death 
himself or the Gods or the mighty titans seek to bar bis passage, 
he will destroy them all. O Princess, in thine absence, Rama 
stricken with grief is no longer able to find rest, like an elephant 
who is attacked by a lion. O Goddess, I swear to thee by 
the Mandara, Malava, Vindhya, Meru and Dardura Mountains 
and all the fruits and roots, that thou shalt soon behold Rama's 
lovely countenance with his beautiful eyes, lips like unto the 
Bimba fruit, and charming earrings, who resembles the risen 
moon. Soon thou shalt see Rama on Mount Prasravana, 
O Vaidehi, like Shatakratu seated on Airavata. Eschewing 
flesh and wine, Rama subsists on the fruits and roots of the 
forest alone, carefully prepared by Lakshmana of which he 
partakes at the fifth period of the day. So absorbed is he in 
the thought of thee that he no longer drives away flies, insects 
and worms from his body. Sunk in his reflection, lost in grief, 
he is wholly absorbed in thy contemplation. Rama, the fore most among men no longer sleeps but should his eyelids 
close in weariness he starts up crying : * O Sita ! * in gentle 
accents. Whenever he beholds a fruit or flower or any other 
object dear to women, he sighs ' O My dear Love ! \ O 
Goddess, that prince unceasingly calls on thee, crying : ' O 
Sita '> and in order rind to thee has resorted to every means." 
Hearing Rama's praises, Sita was greatly delighted, but 
grieved also to learn of his pain so that she resembled the 
autumn moon entering a dark cloud to re-appear once more. 
421 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 37 
Sita refuses to be rescued by Hanuman 
The moon-faced Sita, hearing this speech, addressed Hanuman 
in words, fraught with piety and sound judgment : — 
" O Monkey, thou hast revealed to me that Rama is wholly 
pre-occupied with my remembrance and also that he is plunged 
in grief, which is as nectar mingled with poison. Whether 
man be at the height of his power or in the abyss of sorrow, 
death draws him as with a cord. Living beings are unable 
to escape their destiny, O Excellent Monkey, behold how I, 
Rama and Saumitri are sunk in misery ! As a wreck floating 
on the waters seeks to reach the shore, so does Raghava seek 
to come to the end of his woes. 
" After destroying the titans, slaying Ravana and laying 
Lanka waste, will not my lord see me once again ? Do thou 
tell him to hasten, for at the end of this year I must die. This 
is the tenth month and two alone remain, that is the term 
fixed for me by that evil wretch, Ravana. His brother Bibi shana made great entreaty to him to restore me, but he paid 
no heed to his proposals. Ravana does not look with favour 
on my release for death lies in wait for him, driven on, as he is, 
by fate. O Warrior, on her mother's request, Kala, Bibishana's 
eldest daughter told me of this. There is an old and trusty 
titan, named Avindha, full of wisdom, virtue, intelligence and 
nobility, highly revered by Ravana, who prophesied the im minent destruction of the titans by Rama, but that perverse 
wretch disregarded his salutory words. O Best of Monkeys, 
I still hope that my lord will soon be re-united with me, for my 
heart is pure and Rama's virtues are infinite. He is endowed 
with endurance, courage, compassion, gratitude, energy and 
strength, O Monkey. What foe would not tremble before 
him, who slew fourteen thousand demons in Janasthana without 
his brother's aid ? That lion among men cannot be surpassed 
by the titan warriors; I am conversant with his powers as 
4» 
SUNDARA KANDA 
Sachi is with Indra's. O Monkey, that sun, Rama, with his 
innumerable arrows as his rays, will dry up the lake of hostile 
titans ! " 
Speaking thus, Sita, overwhelmed with grief at the thought 
of Rama, her face bathed in tears, was again addressed by 
Hanuman, who said to her : — 
" No sooner shall I have spoken to Raghava, than he will 
hasten hither at the head of a powerful army composed of 
bears and monkeys or shall I deliver thee this very day from 
the grasp of those titans and these present afflictions ? Do 
thou climb upon my back, O Irreproachable Lady, and bear ing thee on my shoulders, I will cross over the sea ; verily I 
am able to carry away the City of Lanka together with Ravana 
himself. This day, as Anila bears the sacrificial offerings unto 
Shakra, I shall bring thee back to Raghava on the Prasravana 
Mountain, O Maithili ! To-day thou shalt behold Rama, 
who is accompanied by Lakshmana, preparing to destroy the 
enemy, as Vishnu engaged in the destruction of the Daityas 
and thou shalt see that mighty hero, eager to behold thee, on 
that solitary mountain, resembling Purandara on the head of 
the King of the Serpents. 
" O Lovely Goddess, mount on my shoulders, do not hesitate 
and be united with Rama, as Rohini is restored to Shashanka, 
as Sachi to Indra, or Savarshala to the Sun. I shall cross 
the ocean by the aerial path ! O Fair One, bearing thee away 
from here, none of the dwellers in Lanka will be able to follow 
me. I shall return as I came, O Vaidehi, bearing thee through 
space." 
Hearing these astonishing words, Maithili, trembling with 
joy, said to Hanuman : " How canst thou hope to carry me 
so great a distance, O Hanuman? This demonstrates thy 
monkey nature ! How dost thou deem it possible that thy 
little body should convey me from here to my lord, that 
king among men, O Monkey ? " 
At these words Hanuman reflected: "This is the first 
affront I have suffered ! Vaidehi is unaware of my prowess and 
strength. She snail learn that I am able to assume any shape 
at will ! " Thinking thus, that foremost of monkeys, Hanuman, 
the scourge of his foes, showed himself to Sita in his true form. 
423 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
In order to inspire Sita with confidence, leaping down from 
the tree, that monkey began to expand in size and grew equal 
to the Meru or Mandara Mountain or a flaming brazier and 
that lion among monkeys, of a coppery countenance, his body 
like a mountain, with nails and teeth like diamonds, standing 
before Sita, said : — 
" I am capable of uprooting Lanka with its hills, woods, 
fields, palaces, ramparts and gates and its monarch also ! 
Take heart therefore O Queen, do not delay further, O Vaidehi! 
Come and dispel the grief of Raghava as also Lakshmana's." 
Seeing the son of the Wind-god grow to the size of a moun tain, the daughter of Janaka, whose eyes resembled lotus 
petals, said to him : — 
" O Mighty Monkey, now I recognise the extent of thy 
powers and thy speed which equals the wind, also thy radiance 
like unto fire. How should an ordinary monkey have reached 
this land beyond the infinite ocean ? I know that thou art able 
to take me from here and bear me away, but, O Foremost of 
Monkeys, I must consider if the consequences are to mine 
advantage. Furthermore, is it fitting for me to go with thee ? 
Thy speed equal to the wind may render me giddy and I 
might fall from thy back whilst thou wert proceeding high 
over the ocean. Flung into the sea filled with sharks, croco diles and giant fish, I should certainly become the chosen prey 
of those monsters. Nay, I cannot go with thee, O Destroyer 
of Thy Foes and for thee undoubtedly there is also grave 
danger. When the titans see thee bearing me away, they will 
pursue thee at the wicked Ravana's command and, surrounded 
by those warriors furnished with spears and maces, carrying 
a woman, thou wilt be beset with peril, O Hero ! Fully armed, 
in great numbers, those titans would pursue thee, who art 
unarmed ; how couldst thou then resist them and protect me ? 
And when thou art engaged in combat with those terrible 
demons, O Foremost of Monkeys, I, stricken with fear, will 
slip from thy back. Those terrible, huge and powerful titans 
would then end by overcoming thee in the conflict, O Excellent 
Monkey. Or turning my head, whilst thou art engaged in 
fight, I should fall and those wicked titans would bear me 
away and bring me hither or, wresting me from thy grasp, 
424 
SUNDARA KANDA 
tear me to pieces. Victory or defeat is uncertain in combat ! 
If I died under the threats of the titans, O First of the Monkeys, 
all thine efforts to deliver me will have been in vain. Though 
thou art well able to destroy all the titans, Rama's fame would 
thereby suffer decrease or the titans, bearing me away, would 
confine me in a secret place unknown to the monkeys or to 
Rama. Then, all thine efforts to rescue me will have been 
fruitless, but if Rama returns with thee, great will be the 
chances of success. 
" O Great-armed Warrior, the lives of Raghava, of his 
two brothers and of King Sugriva depend on me. Having 
given up hope of delivering me, worn out with grief and 
anxiety, those two brothers with all the bears and monkeys 
would end their existence. O Monkey, furthermore, being 
wholly devoted to my lord, I am unable to touch the body of 
any save Rama. When I was forced into contact with Ravana's 
limbs, I was helpless and without a defender and was no 
longer in control of my person. If Rama comes to destroy 
Ravana and the titans and takes me away from here, it will 
be a feat worthy of him ! I have heard of that hero's great 
exploits and have myself witnessed them, nor can Devas, Nagas 
nor titans equal Rama on the field of battle ! 
" Who, having beheld him in combat, wielding his mar- 
vellous bow, endowed with a valour and strength like unto 
Indra's, could withstand Rama who is accompanied by Laksh mana and who resembles a fire fanned by the wind ? O Fore most of Monkeys, who would seek to oppose Rama, accompanied 
by Lakshmana, resembling elephants intoxicated with Mada 
juice, showering shafts like the rays of the sun at the time of 
the dissolution of the worlds ? O Best of Monkeys, do thou 
bring my dear one and Lakshmana with the Lord of the 
Monkey Hosts, here with all speed. On account of separation 
from Rama, I have long been consumed with grief, now, O 
Valiant Monkey, make me happy once more." 
425 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 38 
She gives Hanuman her Jewel 
Highly gratified by Sita's words, that lion among monkeys 
answered thus : — 
" O Fair Lady of auspicious presence, thou hast spoken 
in accord with thy feminine nature and with the modesty of 
one devoted to her lord ! As a woman, it would not be possible 
for thee to cross the sea, four hundred miles in width on my 
back and the plea that thou hast made, saying ' I may not touch 
the body of any save Rama' is worthy of thee, O Goddess, con sort of that rnagnanimous One. Who but thou would utter 
such words, O Janaki ? Truly Kakutstha shall hear from 
beginning to end all thou hast said and done in my presence, 
O Princess. For many reasons did I speak to thee thus, O Lady, 
anxious as I was to compass Rama's design, and my heart 
troubled with feelings of affection. Further it was with great 
difficulty that I penetrated into the City of Lanka and traversed 
the ocean and debating what was meet for me to do, I addressed 
thee in this wise. I wished to bring thee back to the one 
who is the delight of the House of Raghu this day ! It was my 
devotion for him and in regard for thee, that I uttered those 
words. As, however, thou art unable to come with me, O 
Irreproachable Lady, do thou give me some token which will 
inspire Rama with faith in me." 
Being thus addressed by Hanuman, Sita, who resembled 
the daughter of the Gods, answered him in feint accents, her 
voice broken with sobs : — " This is the most perfect token 
thou canst take to my dear lord ! Do thou say this to him : — 
* O Rama, when we formerly resided at the foot of the Chittra kuta Mountain in the eastern region, not fer distant from 
where the ascetics dwelt, in a place rich in roots, fruit and 
water near the river Mandakini, whilst ranging the flowery 
groves, redolent with fragrance, thou, having sported in the 
lake, rested all dripping on my breast. At that moment a 
426 
SUNDARA KANDA 
crow, approaching, sought to peck me and I threw a stone 
at it ; nevertheless that ferocious devourer of offerings, deter mined to wound me, would not leave its prey and in my wrath 
I removed my girdle, in order to strike the bird and my robe 
slipped down. On seeing this, thou didst laugh at me, whereat 
I blushed with shame and indignation. Harassed by that crow, 
who was wild with hunger, X took refuge with thee, and ex hausted, threw myself into thine arms as thou wert seated there. 
Though I was still vexed, thou didst pacify me by thy laughter 
and my face being bathed in tears, gently dried my eyes ; thus 
I was seen by thee, greatly enraged by the crow, O Lord. 
Exhausted, O Rama, I slept for a long time on thy breast, and 
thou in thy turn, didst sleep on mine, O Elder Brother of 
Bharata. Then, as I awoke, that crow approached me once 
more and, as I rose from thine arms, tore my breast with its 
beak, O Raghava. Thereupon, at the shedding of blood, 
thou didst wake and beholding my breast lacerated, O Long armed Hero, highly incensed and hissing like a serpent, thou 
didst speak thus : — 
" O Thou, whose thighs resemble the trunk of an elephant, 
who has wounded thy breast ? Who seeks to play with an angry 
five-headed serpent ? " 
" Thereafter, looking round, thou didst perceive that crow, 
who, with sharp and bloody talons stood before me. That 
bird, prince of winged creatures, was the son of Indra and with 
the swiftness of the wind, it disappeared into the earth. Then 
thou, O Long-armed Warrior, thine eyes rolling in fury, 
resolved to destroy that crow and, plucking a blade of kusha 
grass, from where thou hadst lain, transformed it into Brahma's 
shaft and it burst into flame, like unto the fire of death before 
the bird. Hurling that fiery brand, it followed that bird high 
into the sky and, pursued by the fiery dart, the crow flew 
this way and that, thus traversing many regions and ranging 
through the Three Worlds, repulsed by his sire and the sages; 
at last it sought refuge with thee, falling on the earth and 
beseeching mercy of thee. Though worthy of death, thou, 
O Kakutstha, ever willing to succour all beings, out of com passion, spared him. Then, speaking unto the one who was 
exhausted and distressed, thou didst say : — " This weapon of 
427 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Brahma may never remain ineffective, therefore say what is 
now to be done ? " Then the crow answered : — " I will give 
up my right eye," whereupon Ramachandra destroyed the 
right eye of that crow. Having sacrificed the right eye, his 
life was spared and, paying obeisance to Rama, as also to 
King Dasaratha, the crow, delivered by that warrior, returned 
to his abode. O Thou, who, on my behalf, didst discharge the 
Brahma-weapon, even at a crow, why dost thou leave him who 
bore me away, unpunished ? O Foremost of Men, show thy 
compassion to me and inspire me with hope. I am conversant 
with thy great energy, thine immense endurance, thine amazing 
strength, thine irresistible power unfettered by the limitations 
of time and space, incapable of being disturbed, thou who art 
deep like the ocean, lord of the earth and the equal of Vasava 
himself ! Thou, the first among bowmen, who art full of ardour, 
and courage, wherefore dost thou not direct thy weapons against 
the titans ? Neither Nagas, Gandharvas, Gods nor Maruts can 
resist thee in combat \ 
" If that warrior still retains any regard for me, why does he 
not exterminate the titans with his whetted shafts, or why 
does not Lakshmana, the repressor of his foes, endowed with 
energy, deliver me at his brother's behest ? Since those two 
tigers among men, equal to Vayu and Indra are invincible 
even against the Celestials, why do they disregard me ? 
" Alas ! I must be guilty of some heinous sin, since those 
twin scourges of their foes, though able to do so, fail to come 
to my rescue ! " 
Hearing Vaidehi's piteous words, uttered with her eyes full 
of tears, the mighty Hanuman, foremost of the monkeys, 
said : — " O Exalted One, I swear to thee that Rama's features 
are altered on account of the sorrow he feels for thee and, 
seeing his brother overwhelmed with grief, Lakshmana too is 
rilled with distress, this is the truth, O Goddess. Since I 
have now found thee, there is no cause to lament further and 
thou shalt soon see an end to thy woes, O Lovely One. Those 
two tigers among men, those princes of incalculable energy, 
in their eagerness to see thee, will burn the worlds to ashes. 
Having slain that formidable warrior, Ravana with his kinsfolk, 
Raghava shall return with thee to the palace. 
428 
SUNDARA KANDA 
" Now tell me what I shall say to Rama and Lakshmana, 
who are filled with valour and the illustrious Sugriva and all 
the assembled monkeys ? " 
Hanuman having uttered these words, Sita answered him 
saying : — 
" Bowing low to that Lord of the World, enquire after the 
welfare of that protector of men, whom Kaushalya has brought 
forth and wish him all prosperity from me. Then offer 
salutations to the one of whom Sumitra is the happy mother, 
he, who renounced garlands, jewels, his beloved consort, the 
dominion of a vast realm hard to attain and his father and 
mother, after bidding them a tender farewell, in order to 
follow Rama. That virtuous prince, who, in his devotion, 
sacrificed unsurpassed felicity, accompanied his brother 
Kakutstha to the forest, watching over him ; he who is great, 
wise and pleasing to look upon, possessing broad shoulders 
and who looks on Rama as his father and reverences me as his 
mother, that valiant Lakshmana, who did not know that I was 
being borne away. Full of deference for the aged, dignified 
and brave, measured in speech, the foremost of those dear 
unto that king's son and worthy of his father-in-law, he who 
even undertaketh these tasks to which he is not equal, whose 
presence causes Rama to forget his sire, who is dearer to him 
than I ; Lakshmana, the brother of Rama, to him do thou 
offer obeisance from me and repeat my words to him. May 
that noble and virtuous one, beloved of Rama, ever mild and 
pure, bring an end to my sufferings, O Best of Monkeys ! O 
Chief of the Monkeys, do thou bring about the success of 
this undertaking. May Rama, on thine instigation, make a 
supreme effort on my behalf. Further, do thou repeat these 
words of mine again and again to him : — 
" ' I have but one month to live, O Son of Dasaratha ! After 
that month I shall die ; I swear to thee that this is the truth I 
speak ! Deliver me from the hands of that cruel and wicked 
Ravana, O Hero, as Kaushiki was delivered from hell V* 
Saying this, Sita drew from her robe the pearl which formerly 
adorned her forehead, which shone with celestial radiance, 
and bestowing it on Hanuman, said : " Give this to 
Raghava." 
429 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Then the valiant Hanuman, taking the priceless jewel, placed 
it on his finger, it being too small for his arm and, that foremost 
of monkeys, having received the pearl, paid obeisance to Sita, 
circumambulating her from left to right. Filled with delight 
on having found the princess, Hanuman had already returned 
to Rama and Lakshmana in thought. 
And taking that costly and superb ornament that the daughter 
of King Janaka had carried carefully concealed in her sari, 
Hanuman, as if delivered from a hurricane that had overtaken 
him on a high mountain, his heart full of serenity, once more 
prepared to set out on his return journey. 
chapter 39 
Hanuman calms Sita's Fears 
Having given the jewel to Hanuman, Sita said to him : — 
'* This token is well known to Raghava and seeing this pearl, 
the valiant Rama will call three people to mind, my mother, 
myself and King Dasaratha. O Best of Monkeys, thy heroism 
being further stimulated by this enterprise, consider carefully 
what fresh efforts are needed ; thou art capable of under- 
taking this task, think therefore what course Rama should 
adopt to bring my misfortunes to an end. O Hanuman seek 
by thine exertions to terminate my sufferings ! " 
Thereupon the son of the Wind-god of immense energy, 
replied : " So be it," and making obeisance to Vaidehi, pre pared to depart, but that exalted one, Videha's daughter, 
seeing Hanuman about to leave, her voice strangled with sobs, 
said unto him : — 
" O Hanuman, do thou communicate my desires for the 
happiness of Rama, Lakshmana, Sugriva, his ministers and all 
the other monkeys and, O Best of Monkeys, in consonance 
with righteousness, wish them well. It behoveth thee to do 
that which will cause the long-armed Rama to deliver me 
from the ocean of affliction in which I am plunged. O 
Hanuman, do thou speak so that the illustrious Rama rescue 
430 
SUNDARA KANDA 
me from here while I am yet alive and thereby reap the fruits 
of virtue. Listening to that which thou shalt relate to him 
of me, that son of Dasaratha, ever filled with valour, will feel 
his daring increased a hundredfold in the thought of reunion 
with me. The heroic Rama, hearing the appeal I have charged 
thee to deliver to him will be inspired to display increasing 
prowess." 
Listening to Sita's words, Hanuman, born of Maruta, with 
joined palms, made answer to her saying : — 
" Soon shall Kakutstha, surrounded by the foremost monkeys 
and bears, come, and vanquishing his enemies in fight, dispel 
thy grief. I know of none among mortals, titans or Gods, 
who can withstand him when he discharges his arrows. Wert 
thou the price of victory, he would be able to challenge the 
Sun or Parjanya or Vaivasvata or Yama himself in conflict 
and would prepare to conquer the whole earth that is bounded 
by the sea, O Delight of Janaka." 
Hearing these pleasing, true and sweetly expressed words, 
Janaki addressed Hanuman with respect, who had spoken out 
of devotion to his master, and said : — " O Hero, if thou 
judgest it to be wise, then tarry here for one day more and, 
having rested in some hidden spot, set out to-morrow ! Thy 
presence, O Monkey, will cause me to forget my great mis fortune awhile, I who have experienced so little happiness. 
But shouldst thou depart to-day, O Lion among Monkeys, 
my life will be in danger till thy return, this is certain. Further more, not seeing thee will prove an increased torment, afflicted 
as I am with grief and, O Hero, this doubt haunts me con tinually,— ' How will that powerful King, in the midst of the 
forces of his monkeys and bears and those two sons of a 
monarch, cross the impassable ocean ? ' In all the worlds, 
three beings alone have the power to traverse the sea ; 
Garuda, thou and Maruta ! In the face of this insurmountable 
obstacle, what means to success canst thou see, O Most Skilled 
of Beings? Undoubtedly thou art able to encompass this 
undertaking unaided, O Destroyer of Hostile Warriors but 
thou alone wouldst then reap the glory. If Rama, however, 
together with his armies vanquished Ravana and, delivering 
me, returned to his own city, that exploit would be worthy 
43* 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
of him. If, crossing the sea and besieging Lanka, that destroyer 
of hostile forces Kakutstha, bore me hence, he would have 
accomplished what is natural to him. Do thou therefore act 
in such wise that that valiant warrior may be able to manifest 
his prowess ! " 
Hearing these words, fraught with sense and reason, full of 
affection, Hanuman replied mildly : — 
" O Queen, the leader of the forces of bears and monkeys, 
Sugriva, full of energy, has resolved to liberate thee. Sur rounded by millions of monkeys, that destroyer of titans will 
come hither without delay. There are, under his command, 
monkeys endowed with valour, energy and extreme prowess, 
swift as thought, able to go upward or downward and to every 
side, nothing can impede their course, no task, however hard, 
defeats their immeasurable courage. Nay, more than once, 
by their amazing endurance, they have encircled the entire 
earth with its seas and mountains on every side, by resorting 
to the wind's path. Among those Rangers of the Woods, 
some are equal to me and some superior and, in the whole of 
Sugriva's company, there is none who is less so. Since I 
have reached this place, how much more are those valiant 
monkeys able to do so ! Nor are the superior ones sent on 
errands but those of less account. O Queen, have no 
anxiety and abandon thy grief; with a single bound, those fore* 
most of monkeys will reach Lanka and those two brothers, 
resembling the sun and moon about to rise, will speed to thy 
side, riding on my back. Having slain Ravana and his hordes, 
Raghava, the delight of the House of Raghu, will take hold of 
thee, O Lady of Lovely Limbs, in order to bring thee back 
to thine own city. Therefore let courage and happiness attend 
thee, have faith in the dawning of that hour ; ere long, thou 
shalt behold Rama shining like a flame. 
" That Indra of the Titans, his sons, counsellors and kinsfolk, 
being slain, thou shalt be re-united with Rama as Shashanka 
with Rohini. Soon thou shalt see the end of thy woes, O 
Divine Maithili, and Ravana will fall under Rama's blows 
before thine eyes I " 
Having thus sought to comfort Videha's daughter, Hanuman, 
born of Maruta, preparing to depart, spoke yet again, saying : — 
433 
SUNDARA KANDA 
" Thou shalt soon behold the destroyer of his foes, Raghava 
of subdued soul, as also Lakshmana, bearing his bow in his 
hand at the gates of Lanka. Ere long thou shalt see those 
valiant monkeys, endowed with the courage of lions and tigers, 
resembling the lord of elephants, fighting with their nails and 
teeth. O Noble One, innumerable companies of monkeys 
will be seen by thee, resembling hills or clouds, roaring on 
the plateaus of Malaya and Lanka. Like an elephant attacked 
by a lion, Rama is deeply wounded by the formidable shafts 
of the God of Love ! O Goddess, weep no more, but banish 
fear and sorrow from thy heart ; thou shalt be reunited with 
thy consort, O Beautiful One, as Sachi was to Indra. 
" Who can overcome Rama ? Who is equal to Saumitri ? 
Those two brothers, resembling the wind and fire, are thy 
support. O Goddess, thou shalt no< have to dwell long in this 
place inhabited by formidable titans ; thy beloved will not 
delay his coming ; have patience till I return ! " 
chapter 40 
He takes leave of Sita 
Hearing the words of that magnanimous son of Vayu, Sita, 
who resembled a daughter of the Gods, replied in significant 
words, saying : — 
"As the rain, ripening the grain, rejoiceth the earth, so am 
I gladdened on seeing thee, O Monkey, who speaketh sweetly 
of my beloved. In compassion for me, who am emaciated 
with suffering, do that which will enable me to meet with that 
tiger among men, soon. O Foremost of Monkeys, call to his 
remembrance, that reed the crow destroyed in his anger, 
having been deprived of an eye and also how, when my tilaka 
mark was effaced, he painted another on my cheek, which he 
will surely remember. Say : ' O Thou who resemblest Indra, 
how, with thy valour, canst thou suffer Sita to be borne away 
and set in the midst of the titans ? That celestial pearl which 
433 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
adorned my forehead, I have preserved with care. In my 
misfortunes, I have oft looked on it with delight as on thyself, 
0 Irreproachable Hero ! Yielding up this jewel, I shall not 
live long, being overwhelmed with grief. For thy sake, O 
Rama, I endure insufferable misery and the menaces of the 
titans which cleave my heart ! O Destroyer of thy Foes, I 
shall live for one more month, after which, bereft of thee, 
1 shall yield up my life. The King of the Titans is a source 
of dread to me ; if I learn that thou dost hesitate in coming 
to mine aid, I shall instantly give up my life '." 
Witnessing Vaidehi's tears and lamentations, the mighty 
Hanuman, born of Maruta, answered : — 
" O Goddess, thy misfortunes have rendered Rama's features 
wan, I swear to thee this is the truth and seeing Rama overcome 
with sorrow, Lakshmana too is deeply distressed. Now that 
I have found thee, there is no cause for despair ! Soon, soon, 
thou shalt see an end to thy woes, O Lovely Princess ! Those 
blameless princes, foremost of men, eager to see thee, will 
reduce Lanka to ashes. Having slain Ravana in combat, 
those two scions of the House of Raghu will take thee back 
to their own city, O Large-eyed Lady ! O Irreproachable 
Damsel, it is now for thee to give me such a token, that Rama 
will instantly recognise and that will delight his heart." 
Sita answered : — " I have already furnished thee with an 
excellent token. Seeing that jewel, Rama will instantly believe 
thy words.*' 
Receiving the marvellous pearl, the Prince of the Monkeys 
inclined his head to that exalted one and prepared to depart 
Beholding that foremost of monkeys expanding bis form 
and, charged with energy, preparing to leap, her face bathed 
in tears, in a voice choked with sobs, Sita said to him : — 
" O Hanuman, do not fail to offer my good wishes for their 
welfare to those two brothers, Rama and Lakshmana, who 
resemble two lions and to Sugriva also and his court. Do 
that which will cause the long-armed Raghava to deliver me 
from this ocean of affliction, where I am held prisoner. On 
thy return, when thou art near him, tell him of my harsh and 
bitter affliction and the threats of the titans ! May prosperity 
attend thee, O Chief of the Monkeys." 
434 
SUNDARA KANDA 
Having received these instructions from the princess, the 
monkey, his purpose accomplished, exceedingly exultant, 
reflecting that little remained for him to do, had already crossed 
the northern region in thought. 
chapter 4 I 
Hanuman destroys the Ashoka Grove 
Having been honoured by Sita, the monkey, leaving that 
place, began to reflect on what little remained for him to do 
since he had discovered that dark-eyed Princess. 
Dismissing the three means to success, the fourth now 
appeared to him as appropriate and he reflected in himself: 
" Because of their nature, one may not enter into negotiation 
with the titans nor do gifts avail with the wealthy ; one is 
unable to sow dissension among those who are proud of their 
strength, there remains therefore prowess as applicable here. 
In these circumstances, valour is the only resource. When 
these titans see the foremost of their warriors fall in combat, 
their martial ardour will be subdued. He who accomplishes 
his main purpose and compasses innumerable other engage ments without jeopardising the original enterprise, is a skilful 
messenger. He who employs all his resources to execute a 
minor task, has no sagacity, but the one who uses countless 
means with the minimum effort, is wise. Though my mission 
has been fulfilled, yet if, returning to the abode of the King 
of the Monkeys, I have ascertained the strength of the foe 
and ourselves in the field, I shall have truly carried out his 
commands. How shall I act so that my presence here proves 
fruitful ? How can I provoke an encounter with the titans and 
what can I do so that that Ten-necked One will be made to 
measure his strength with mine own? Coming face to face with 
Dashagriva on the field accompanied by his counsellors, his 
army and charioteer, I shall easily read his intentions and 
then take my leave. 
435 2F 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
" I shall now proceed to lay waste this magnificent grove, 
resembling the Nandana Gardens, that ravishes the eye 
and where every variety of tree and creeper, is found, as the 
forest fire consumes the dead trees and this destruction will 
incite Ravana's fury. Thereafter the King of the Titans 
will call upon his immense army furnished with tridents and 
iron pikes, and the horsemen, chariots and elephants, of which it 
is composed, and a formidable struggle will ensue. Then I shall 
fight with all my strength against those titans and having 
defeated the assembled forces of Ravana, I shall return safely 
to the King of the Monkeys." 
Thinking thus, Maruti, like a raging tempest, with immense 
energy began to root up the trees with his powerful and 
sinuous thighs, breaking them down, as also the creepers of 
that grove, where the trumpeting of maddened elephants could 
be heard. 
With its trees uprooted, its foundations shattered, the crests 
of the hills broken away and all that was fair laid waste, the 
copper-tinted buds, the trees and creepers withering away, 
that grove appeared as if a fire had consumed it and the 
flowering sprays blown hither and thither, resembled women 
with their robes in disarray. With its grassy dells and charm ing pavilions ruined, tiger, deer and birds emitting cries of 
fear and the edifices crumbling, that great demesne was bereft 
of beauty. And that grove, belonging to the women of the 
inner apartments, where they were wont to sport, with its 
avenues of Ashoka trees and its creepers, now laid waste by 
that monkey, was transformed by him into a heap of ruins. 
Then having given that powerful lord of the earth cause for 
severe displeasure, that monkey, eager to fight against those 
countless valiant titans single-handed, stationed himself at the 
gate, blazing with effulgence. 
CHAPTER 42 
He destroys the Kinkaras 
Meanwhile the cries of birds and the crash of falling trees, 
struck terror into the hearts of the inhabitants of Lanka. Wild 
436 
SUNDARA KANDA 
beasts and birds fled hither and thither in terror on every side 
and inauspicious omens appeared. 
Waking from sleep, those grim-visaged titan women beheld 
the grove devastated by that mighty and heroic monkey and, 
in order to inspire them with fear, that long-armed one, full 
of energy, began to increase in size and they, observing that 
immense ape, as high as a hill, of unimagined power, enquired 
of Janaka's daughter, saying : — 
" Who is this being ? From whence and wherefore has he 
come hither ? Why did he converse with thee ? Tell us, O 
Large-eyed Lady, have no fear O Dark-eyed Lovely One." 
Thereupon, the virtuous Sita, of faultless limbs, answered 
them saying : — " Since the titans are able to change their form 
at will, by what means should I be able to recognise them? 
Ye know what he is and what he is about ! Without doubt, 
serpents know the secret of the serpent's tail ! As for me, 
I am terrified nor do I know what he is but believe him to be 
a titan, who has come hither, able to change his form at 
will." 
Hearing Vaidehi's words, the titan women fled with all 
speed, a few only remaining, whilst some hastened to inform 
Ravana of what had taken place. 
Thereafter those female titans of hideous aspect, approached 
the King of the Titans and informed him of that monstrous 
and formidable monkey in the Ashoka grove, saying : — 
" O King, there is a monkey of immense size, endowed with 
immeasurable strength, who, having held converse with Sita, 
remains there. We besought the daughter of Janaka whose 
eyes resemble a doe*s, to inform us who this monkey was 
but she would not disclose it. It may be that he is an emissary 
of Indra or Kuvera or even of Rama himself, who is anxious 
to discover where Sita is. This being of strange aspect, has 
completely destroyed thy wonderful pleasure garden that was 
filled with beasts of every kind. There is not a single quarter 
that has not been laid waste by him, save the place where the 
divine Janaki abides, whether to preserve her or for reasons of 
exhaustion, we know not, but since he is a stranger to fatigue, 
we deem it is on account of this woman. And the Ashoka 
tree, covered with buds and lovely foliage, under the shade 
437 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
of which Sita is sheltering, has been spared by him. It 
behoveth thee to inflict some severe penalty on this formidable 
being, who has held converse with Sita and destroyed the 
grove. O Lord of the Hosts of Titans, who would dare to 
converse with her for whom thine heart yearns without suffer ing death ? " 
Hearing the words of the demons, Ravana, the King of the 
Titans, his eyes rolling in rage, flamed up like a funeral pyre 
and, in his wrath tears fell from his eyes like drops of burning 
oil from a lighted lamp. 
Then that mighty monarch ordered those titans named 
Kinkaras, whose strength equalled his own, to seize Hanuman 
whereupon eighty thousand of those retainers speedily issued 
from the palace, bearing maces and iron hooks in their hands. 
Possessing huge stomachs and large teeth, formidable to look 
upon, filled with valour and martial ardour, they were all 
burning to lay hold of that monkey. Approaching Hanuman 
who was standing at the gate ready to fight, those powerful 
titans rushed upon him like moths on a flame. Equipped 
with maces of different kinds and gold-encircled bracelets, 
with arrows bright as the sun, hammers, axes, spears, darts 
and lances, they surrounded Hanuman and began their attack. 
Then he, full of strength and courage, resembling a hill, lashing 
his tail, began to roar, waving it to and fro, and expanding in 
size, that son of the Wind-god filled Lanka with his bellowing. 
On account of the noise of the swishing of his tail and his 
roaring, the birds began to fall from the air and he proclaimed 
in a loud voice : — " Victory to the mighty Rama and the valiant 
Lakshmana ! Victory to Sugriva, protected by Raghava ! I 
am the servant of the Sovereign of Koshala, Rama, of im perishable exploits, I am Hanuman, the destroyer of hostile 
armies, the offspring of Maruta. A thousand Ravanas cannot 
stand before me in combat, when I crush them beneath a 
myriad trees and rocks ! Under the very eyes of the titans, 
I shall destroy the City of Lanka and, paying obeisance to 
Maithili, depart, my purpose being accomplished 1 " 
On hearing his shouts, the titans were seized with terror 
and they beheld him standing aloft like a great evening cloud 
and, knowing now that that monkey had been despatched by 
438 
SUNDARA KANDA 
his master, under the command of their lord they began to 
assail him on all sides with every kind of formidable weapon. 
Surrounded by those warriors, that mighty monkey seized 
hold of an iron bar that stood near the gate, and lifting it, 
struck those Rangers of the Night, and he appeared like Vinata's 
offspring carrying away a struggling serpent. Grasping the 
weapon, that valiant monkey began to destroy those demons, 
moving here and there in the air, as Indra of a thousand eyes 
crushed the Daityas with his thunderbolt. 
Having slain the titans, that heroic and powerful son of 
Maruta, thirsting for combat, stationed himself at the gate. 
Thereafter the few titans, who had escaped, informed Ravana 
of the destruction of his servants and, hearing that a mighty host 
of demons had been slain, the king, bis eyes rolling in wrath, 
commanded the son of Prahasta, who was endowed with 
matchless courage, invincible in battle, to go forth. 
CHAPTER 43 
He burns the Temple and Monument 
Having slain the Kinkaras, Hanuman, reflecting awhile, 
thought to himself : — " I have laid waste the grove but I have 
not destroyed the sacred temple, I shall now demolish this 
sanctuary." 
Thinking thus, the son of Maruta, displaying his prowess, 
bounded to the temple that was as high as the peak of Mount 
Meru, and scaling that edifice, that resembled a mountain, 
that chief of the monkeys, manifested a great effulgence, 
equal to the radiance of the sunrise. Thereafter he began to 
destroy that lofty sanctuary which shone with a glory equal 
to the Pariyatra Mountain. Assuming immense proportions, 
the illustrious son of Maruta, in his intrepidity, caused Lanka 
to tremble, filling it with his roaring and, at that terrifying and 
deafening clamour, the birds and the guardians of the temple, 
fell to the ground, their senses overcome. 
439 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Thereupon Hanuman cried out : " Victory to Rama, skilled 
in the use of weapons and to the courageous Lakshmana ! 
Victory to King Sugriva, Rama's henchman ! I am Hanuman, 
the destroyer of hostile armies, son of Maruta, and the servant 
of Rama, King of Koshala, of immortal exploits ! When I 
hurl down trees and rocks, not even a thousand Ravanas can 
withstand me in combat. Having destroyed the City of Lanka 
and paid my obeisance to the daughter of the King of Mithila, 
my purpose fulfilled, I shall depart." 
Having spoken thus, the colossal leader of the monkeys, 
standing on that edifice, emitted a roar and the hideous clamour 
struck terror into the hearts of the titans. 
In consequence of that great tumult, a hundred temple guards 
sallied forth, bearing every kind of weapon, dart, scimitar, 
arrow and axe ; and surrounding Maruti struck him with 
clubs and bars encircled with golden bands. Hurling them selves on that excellent monkey with arrows bright as the sun, 
that host of titans resembled a mighty whirlpool in the Ganges. 
Thereat the son of the Wind, the mighty Hanuman, waxing 
wrath, taking on a formidable aspect and tearing up from that 
sanctuary a huge pillar plated with gold, which emitted a 
hundred rays, spun it round rapidly with great energy, so 
that the fire generated therefrom set the temple ablaze. Seeing 
that monument in flames, the leader of monkeys having 
despatched a hundred titans, resembled Indra slaying the 
demons with his thunderbolt and, standing in space, he cried 
out exultingly : — 
" Thousands of leaders of monkeys, resembling myself, 
valiant and brave, are scouring the whole earth under Sugriva's 
command. Among these, some are as strong as elephants, 
others ten times as strong, some have the energy of a thousand 
elephants, some of a whole herd and some have the strength 
of the wind, while a few possess a strength that may not be 
measured. Such are the monkeys, armed with teeth and 
claws, that in hundreds and thousands and millions, will 
accompany Sugriva when he comes to exterminate you all. 
Then neither the city of Lanka nor any of you nor Ravana 
himself will survive, since they have incurred the wrath of that 
hero of the House of Ikshwaku." 
440 
SUNDARA KANDA 
CHAPTER 44 
The Death of Jambumalin 
Under the order of the King of the Titans, the valiant son of 
Prahasta, Jambumalin of large teeth, went out bearing his 
bow. Wearing garlands and red attire with a crown and 
brilliant ear-rings, that invincible warrior of immense stature, 
rolling his eyes ferociously drew his great bow, furnished with 
shining arrows, equal to Indra's, with a noise like thunder. 
Then the entire sky and the four quarters at once re-echoed 
to the sound of the stretching of that bow. 
Beholding him advance in a chariot yoked to asses, Hanuman, 
endowed with great vigour, emitted cries of exultation. 
Thereat the highly powerful Jambumalin riddled him with 
whetted shafts, piercing the face of that leader of monkeys 
with a crescent-shaped arrow, his head with one furnished 
with plumes and his arms with ten having iron tips. Struck 
by those arrows, his coppery countenance shone like an autumn 
cloud lit by the rays of the sun and his ruddy face, stained with 
vermilion, resembled a red lotus in the sky, sprinkled with 
drops of gold. 
Wounded by those shafts, that mighty monkey was enraged 
and seeing a great rock of vast size lying near, he raised it up 
and hurled it against his adversary with violence, who countered 
it with ten of his shafts. Perceiving this feat brought to 
nought, Hanuman, in fury, tore up a mighty Sala tree and 
began to whirl it in the air, whereupon the highly powerful 
Jambumalin, seeing that great monkey spinning the Sala tree, 
let loose innumerable shafts, severing it with four arrows and 
piercing the arms of that monkey with five others, his belly 
with a further dart, thereafter piercing him between the breasts 
with ten more. 
His body, covered with darts, a prey to violent anger, 
Hanuman, seizing a club, spun it with extreme velocity, allow ing it to tall on the huge chest of his adversary, whereupon 
44* 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
neither his head, arms, thighs, bow, his chariot, his steeds nor 
arrows could be distinguished, and that mighty car warrior, 
Jambumalin, dropped to the earth, like an oak that has been 
felled, his limbs and ornaments crushed. 
Then Ravana, hearing that Jambumalin had been slain, as 
also the powerful Kinkaras, was overcome with wrath. Roll ing his eyes inflamed with fury, that Lord of the Titans in stantly issued a command that the sons of his ministers, who 
were endowed with exceeding valour and strength, should go 
forth to the attack. 
chapter 45 
Hanuman slays the Sons of Ravana's Ministers 
Then under the command of that Indra of Titans, the sons 
of his ministers, seven in number, resembling the fire in 
splendour, set out from the palace. Escorted by a large army, 
furnished with bows, full of energy, skilled in the use of wea pons, they, the flower of warriors, were each burning for 
victory. Mounted in great chariots plated with gold, sur mounted by banners, yoked to horses, they created a noise 
resembling thunder. Of unequalled courage, stretching their 
bows inlaid with refined gold, like unto flashes of lightning 
athwart the clouds, those warriors sallied forth. 
Their mothers nevertheless, knowing of the death of the 
Kinkaras, were overcome with anxiety as also their friends and 
kinsfolk. 
And, exhorting one another, clad in golden armour, they 
rushed on Hanuman, who stood erect at the gate. From 
their thundering cars, they loosed innumerable shafts like 
clouds in the rainy season, and, covered by that hail of missiles, 
Hanuman's body was concealed, as the King of the Mountains 
is obscured by rain. 
Then that monkey evaded those arrows and their swiftly 
moving chariots by executing countless skilful evolutions in 
the air and appeared like Indra sporting with his archers, 
442 
SUNDARA KANDA 
the clouds. Sending up a mighty shout which struck terror 
into the great host, that valiant monkey leapt on the titans. 
The scourge of his foes struck some of them with the palm 
of his hands and others with his feet ; some he hit with his 
fists and some he tore with his nails, striking them down with 
his chest and thighs, while some fell to the ground by the 
force of his cry. Felled to the earth, those warriors lay dying 
and the entire army fled to the four quarters, filled with terror, 
Elephants trumpeted and horses fell slain; the ground was 
strewn with the broken fragments of chariots, seats, banners 
and canopies ; rivers of blood could be seen Bowing on the 
highways and Lanka re-echoed with fearful cries. 
Having slaughtered those mighty titans, that heroic monkey, 
burning with courage, desiring to measure his strength against 
other demons, stationed himself at the gate once more. 
CHAPTER 46 
He annihilates five Generals and their Forces 
Learning that the sons of his ministers had fallen under the 
blows of that great monkey, Ravana, with a darkened counten ance, concealing his fears, formed a resolution which he 
deemed would prove decisive. 
Thereupon Dashagriva commanded the leaders of his 
forces, Virupaksha, Yupaksha, Durdharsha, Praghasa and 
Basakarna, masters of strategy, endowed with the speed of 
the wind, brave and skilful warriors, to take Hanuman captive, 
saying : — 
" Ye Generals, who are full of valour, set out at the head 
of your troops with your fleet of horses, chariots and elephants 
and take this monkey prisoner. Approaching that dweller of 
the woods, exercise great circumspection and act with due 
consideration for time and place. Having regard to his con- 
duct, I do not judge him to be a monkey, he being endowed 
with extraordinary prowess. I deem him to be a higher 
being and not a monkey ; perchance he is an emissary created 
443 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
by India by virtue of his penances in order to destroy us. 
Under my command, ye have all triumphed over Nagas, 
Yakshas, Gandharvas, Devas, Asuras and great Rishis ; un doubtedly they are plotting some treachery against us, there fore seize this being by force. O Generals, let each go forth 
at the head of a mighty host, attended by horses, chariots and 
elephants and take this monkey prisoner. In former times I 
have seen monkeys endowed with immense energy, like Bali, 
Sugriva, the exceedingly powerful Jambavan, the General 
Nila and others, such as Dvivida, yet there was nothing alarm ing in their gait, their energy, their prowess, their intelligence, 
their conduct or their capacity to assume different forms, 
this, however, is some great being masquerading as a monkey. 
Even though the Three Worlds with Indra, the Gods, the 
titans and men cannot resist you on the field of battle, great 
efforts will be needed to lay hold of him. Nevertheless, even 
a seasoned warrior, desiring to triumph in combat, is not able 
to defend his life without exertion, for the outcome of a battle 
is uncertain." 
Obedient to the commands of their lord, all those valiant 
titans, resplendent as fire, attended by their troops, threw them selves in all haste into their chariots with sharp and pointed 
weapons and on to their swift steeds and elephants maddened 
with ichor. 
Then those warriors beheld that mighty monkey, shining 
like the sun that rises with its diadem of sparkling rays, and 
seeing him stationed at the gate, possessed of immense strength 
and speed, highly intelligent and brave, with his vast stature 
and huge arms, they were afraid and assailed him from all 
sides with their dreadful weapons. 
Then Durdharsha discharged five white iron, and yellow 
pointed arrows at Hanuman's forehead, possessing the lustre of 
lotus petals, and his head being pierced with those shafts, that 
monkey leapt into the air making the ten cardinal points ring 
with his cry, whereupon that powerful and heroic warrior 
Durdharsha, standing in his chariot with his bow stretched, 
advanced, letting fly a hundred arrows at once. Thereupon, 
Hanuman, like unto the wind driving away clouds, intercepted 
those arrows while coursing in the sky, and sore beset by 
SUNDARA KANDA 
Durdharsha,the offspring of the Wind expanded in size, emitting 
loud roars, and thereafter, with a great bound swooped on the 
chariot of Durdharsha with extreme force, like a succession of 
lightning flashes striking a mountain. Thrown from his car, 
his eight steeds mangled, the pole and the shaft broken, that 
warrior fell to the earth, slain. 
Then Virupaksha and Yupaksha, seeing him lying on the 
ground, waxing wrath sprang up and advanced on Hanuman 
dealing blows with their maces, striking the chest of that 
long-armed monkey as he stood in space ; whereupon he 
meeting the shock of their assault, evaded their arrows and, 
that exceedingly powerful monkey, the son of Anila, swooped 
down on the earth like an eagle ; thereafter seizing and up rooting a Sala tree, assailing those two titans with blows, that 
offspring of the Wind-god slew those two mighty and heroic 
demons. 
Then learning that those three titans had been slain by the 
monkey, endowed with great swiftness, the courageous Praghasa 
rushed upon him laughing scornfully and the audacious 
Basakarna enraged, armed with a spear, also advanced 
towards him. Then each from his side attacked that Hon 
among monkeys. Praghasa assailing him with a sharp-edged 
axe and Basakarna with his spear and, with his body streaming 
with blood, his limbs lacerated by their blows, that monkey, 
highly enraged looked like the rising sun. 
Thereafter that heroic monkey, Hanuman, breaking off the 
peak of a mountain, together with its beasts, snakes and trees, 
crushed those titans, grinding them to dust; and having slain 
those five generals, that monkey proceeded to destroy the 
remaining host. As the Thousand-eyed Deity destroyed 
the Asuras, so did Hanuman, the horses with horses, the 
elephants with elephants, chariots with chariots, and warriors 
with warriors and the pathways were choked with elephants, 
shattered chariots and the bodies of the titans. Having 
destroyed those heroic generals with their forces and vehicles, 
that hero, resembling Time, pausing at the destruction of the 
worlds, rested at the gate. 
445 
THE RAMAVANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 47 
The Death of Aksha 
Hearing that those five generals with their forces and vehicles 
had been struck down by Hanuman, the King of the Titans 
glanced at the youthful Aksha, who full of martial ardour sat 
before him; and that impetuous warrior, armed with a bow 
inlaid with gold, responding to his glance, leapt up like a flame 
that blazes forth when fed with clarified butter by the foremost 
of sages in the sacrificial chamber. 
And he ascended a chariot, acquired at the price of accumu lated sacrifice, plated with refined gold, dressed with flags 
embroidered with pearls, yoked to eight steeds swift as thought, 
unconquerable by Gods or titans, surmounting every obstacle, 
flashing like lightning, of superb workmanship, able to travel 
through space, equipped with quivers, arrows, eight swords, 
darts and lances in orderly array, bound with golden ropes, 
shining with its myriad weapons, bearing golden garlands, 
rivalling the radiance of the sun and moon. Filling the 
firmament, the earth and its mountains with the sound of 
horses, elephants and great chariots, Aksha, at the head of his 
forces, advanced on that monkey, who was stationed on the gate. 
Coming before that monkey, Aksha, with the gaze of a lion, 
in which admiration and respect were mingled, measured 
Hanuman with his glance, who resembled the fire at the dis solution of the worlds intent on destroying all creatures. 
Thereafter that mighty son of Ravana, reflecting on the exceed ing valour of that monkey, his prowess in regards to the enemy 
and on his own strength, swelled up with pride and resembled 
the sun at the end of the world cycle. Then summoning up 
his courage, enraged, he took his stand resolutely in the field, 
and with concentrated mind challenged Hanuman, irresistible 
in combat and of unimaginable prowess, directing three 
whetted shafts upon him. 
446 
SUNDARA KANDA 
Observing that audacious monkey, indifferent to fatigue, 
accustomed to overcoming his foes and proud, Aksha took 
up his bow, holding his arrows in his hand. Wearing a corselet 
and bracelets of gold, with marvellous earrings, endowed 
with martial ardour, Aksha rushed on that monkey and a 
terrific struggle ensued which was unparalleled on earth and 
struck terror even in the Gods and titans. Witnessing that 
mighty conflict between the monkey and the youthful titan, 
the earth cried out, the sun ceased to pour down its warming 
rays, the wind no longer blew and the mountains shook ; 
the whole firmament was filled with the sound and the ocean 
was convulsed. Then that hero, skilled in directing his aim, 
fixed his shafts and loosing them pierced that monkey in the 
forehead with three steel pointed winged arrows plated with 
gold and resembling venomous snakes. 
Wounded by those murderous darts, his eyes blinded by the 
blood flowing from his brow, Hanuman resembled the rising 
sun, having arrows for its rays. Beholding that offspring of 
the foremost of monarchs with his splendid weapons upraised 
and his marvellous bow, that valiant counsellor of the Lord 
of the Monkeys rejoiced and in his ardour put forth his whole 
strength. Resembling the sun crowned with an aureole of 
rays as it rises over the peak of the Mandara Mountain, Hanuman, 
inflamed with ire, filled with strength and energy, consumed the 
youthful Aksha with his forces and vehicles by his fiery glances. 
Thereupon that titan, from his bow equal unto Indra's 
charged with innumerable darts, let fall a mighty shower of 
arrows on the foremost of monkeys in the fight, as a cloud 
looses its waters on a lofty mountain. 
Seeing the youthful Aksha on the field, seething with wrath 
and filled with valour, energy and strength, furnished with 
arrows, that monkey shouted aloud in exultation and, as an 
elephant draws near to a pit concealed in the grass, so did 
Aksha, in the inexperience of his youth, giving rein to his 
fury, proud of his valour, approach that incomparable warrior 
in conflict. Hanuman struck by those shafts, emitted a loud 
roar resembling a thunder cloud and, assuming a formidable 
aspect, full of vigour, agitating his legs and arms, churned up 
the air. 
447 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Leaping upwards, that valiant titan, raining arrows, hurled 
himself upon Hanuman and that foremost of titans, exceed ingly skilled, greatest of car-warriors, Aksha, burning with 
courage, covered him with a hail of shafts, as a cloud covers 
the mountains with hailstones. Evading those arrows by 
darting between them, that heroic monkey, with the speed of 
the wind, swift as thought, began to range the path of the 
air. Casting glances full of pride on Aksha, who was armed 
with bow and arrows, burning to fight and, filling the sky 
with his countless excellent shafts, that offspring of the Wind god became thoughtful and his breast, pierced by the shafts 
of that youthful and powerful hero, he emitted a great shout. 
Recognising the skill of Aksha, he pondered on the warlike 
qualities of that warrior, reflecting : — 
" This great and powerful warrior, like an infant sun in 
splendour, has accomplished deeds incapable of being per formed by a boy ; I am loath to slay one who has shown 
himself equal to every martial feat ; he is high-souled, filled 
with valour, concentrated and able to endure extreme hardship 
in war, worthy of being honoured by the great Sages, Nagas 
and Yakshas ; his strength and courage lend him a noble 
assurance and standing before me, he looks me straight in 
the eyes. Forsooth the heroism of this audacious being 
would shake the soul of the Gods and titans themselves. Verily 
he is an adversary not to be despised, his prowess increases 
as he fights ; if I disregard him, he will defeat me, therefore I 
must destroy him for a spreading fire may not be neglected." 
Reflecting thus on the strength of his foe and his own, that 
powerful one, endowed with energy, resolved to slay his 
adversary. Thereafter that valiant monkey, born of Pavana, 
coursing through the air, struck those eight excellent steeds of 
immense size capable of bearing a heavy burden in combat with 
the palm of his hand and, that great chariot, overturned by 
the blow administered by the counsellor of the King of the 
Monkeys, its pole shattered, the shafts riven, the steeds slain, 
fell to the earth from the sky. 
Thereupon, abandoning his car, bearing his bow and sword, 
that warrior leapt into the air, as an ascetic consequent on his 
penances ascends to heaven on leaving the body. 
448 
SUNDARA KANDA 
Rising into the sky frequented by the King of the Birds, 
the wind and the Celestials, that monkey, with a single bound, 
seizing hold of his legs, as Garuda catches hold of a snake, 
with a strength equal to his sire's, spun him round and round 
and threw him violently on the earth. With his arms, thighs 
and chest crushed, vomiting blood, his bones and eyes pulverised, 
his joints dislocated, his sinews torn, he fell to earth slain by 
the Son of the Wind. 
Thereupon that mighty monkey trod his rival underfoot, 
striking terror into the heart of the King of the Titans, and 
all the Rishis, Cakracaras, Bhutas, Yakshas, Pannagas and 
Suras assembled with their leader Indra, who gazed with 
wonder on the simian slayer of that youthful titan. And 
Hanuman, having destroyed the stripling Aksha, whose eyes 
were inflamed with blood on the field of battle, returned to 
the gate once more and waited there like Death at the time of 
the destruction of all creatures. 
CHAPTER 48 
Hanuman allows himself to be taken captive by the Titans 
The youthful Aksha having been slain by Hanuman, Ravana, 
controlling his agitation, filled with anger, commanded Indrajita, 
who resembled a god, to take the field, saying : — 
" Thou art the foremost of those bearing arms and hast 
afflicted even the Gods and Asuras in war ; thou art renowned 
among warriors and hast acquired divine weapons by the grace 
of Brahma ; thou art invincible in combat, even against the 
Maruts led by Indra himself. There is none in the Three 
Worlds who does not tire in battle, save thou. Thou art 
preserved by thy prowess in arms and thy valour is thy shield ; 
being versed in the knowledge of time and place, thou art 
exceedingly experienced and no feat is impossible for thee to 
accomplish in the field, who art full of forethought ; there is 
none in the Three Worlds but is conversant with thine austeri ties equal to mine own, as also thy prowess and the strength 
449 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
of thine arms in combat, nay, depending on thee, I have no 
anxiety regarding the outcome of the fray. 
" In truth I did not put the same reliance on those who 
have succombed that I now place in thee, O Destroyer of Thy 
Foes, neither in the Kinkaras nor in Jambumalin, the son of 
my counsellor nor in the five generals going forth at the head 
of their troops with innumerable forces, accompanied by 
horses, elephants and chariots nor in the youthful, dearly 
beloved, Aksha, slain by that monkey. O Hero, thou sur passest them all, therefore, reflecting on thine own strength, 
with all haste act in such a manner that the destruction of the 
army may be avoided. O Foremost of those bearing arms, 
considering thine own prowess and that of thine adversary, 
who now reposes quietly after creating carnage among these 
hostile hosts, act so that his might may be subdued. Powerful 
forces can serve no purpose here, for great armies flee before 
Hanuman nor do maces avail ; the speed of Maruti is irre sistible and, like unto Agni, he may not be slain by weapons. 
Therefore, revolving all these things in thy mind and reflecting 
on the divine quality of thy bow, with the intention of bring ing about a successful issue, strive with determination to 
overcome thy foe by frustrating his attacks. Assuredly it 
was not my will to expose thee to this hazard, O Foremost 
among those endowed with intelligence, yet this course of 
action is approved by warriors and is in accord with the duty of 
kings. In war one must be versed in the traditions as also 
in the rules of military science in order to emerge triumphant 
from the struggle." 
Hearing the words of his sire, Indrajita, whose prowess was 
equal to that of the son of Daksha, circumambulated him and 
inspired with martial ardour, prepared to fight. Overwhelmed 
with homage by his cherished companions, who had assembled 
there, he set out for battle. And the resplendent son of the 
King of the Titans, whose eyes resembled the petals of a lotus, 
bounded impetuously forward, like the ocean at the time of 
the full moon. Thereafter, Indrajita of matchless prowess, 
equal unto Indra, ascended his chariot, swift as the eagle or 
the wind, moving freely, drawn by four lions with pure white 
teeth. 
45° 
SUNDARA KANDA 
Standing in his chariot, that most skilled of archers, fully 
conversant with the use of weapons, the foremost of warriors 
drove rapidly to where Hanuman was to be found. 
Hearing the rumbling of wheels and the twanging of the 
bowstring, the delight of that monkey was redoubled, where upon Indrajita, seizing his bow and steel-pointed arrows, 
versed in the art of warfare, proceeded towards Hanuman 
and as he advanced light-heartedly, his weapons in his hand, 
the four quarters grew dark and jackals set up a hideous 
howling. Nagas, Yakshas, Maharishis, Cakracaras and Siddhas 
assembled and the sky was filled with birds emitting piercing 
cries. 
Seeing that chariot bearing down on him, the standard of 
Indra unfurled, that monkey raised a great shout and expanded 
his body ; whereupon, Indrajita in his celestial car, drew back 
his marvellous bow, emitting a sound like thunder and those 
two powerful heroes closed in conflict, the monkey and the 
son of the King of the Titans, like unto God and demon. 
Indifferent to danger they began to fight and that mighty 
monkey evaded the impetuous army of that valiant archer and 
consummate warrior in his great car, by executing a myriad 
evolutions in the air with indescribable agility. Thereupon, 
the heroic Indrajita, slayer of his foes, began to discharge his 
marvellous superbly-fashioned sharp steel-pointed and winged 
arrows, tipped with gold, swift as lightning. Hearing the 
rumbling of that chariot, the rolling of the drums together with 
the sound of the stretching of the bow, Hanuman leapt hither 
and thither and that mighty monkey, evading the rain of arrows, 
skilfully eluded that dexterious bowman, whose target he was, 
and stretching out his arms, Hanuman, the son of Anila, 
turning aside from those missiles, leapt into the sky. Thus 
those skilful and spirited warriors, exceedingly swift in motion 
and versed in the art of warfare, engaged in combat to the 
wonder of all beings. Nor was the titan able to take Hanuman 
unawares nor Maruti surprise Indrajita, as they hurled them selves on one another with a courage worthy of the Gods. 
Observing him unscathed although the target of his infallible 
arrows, Indrajita, controlling his senses, engaged in profound 
concentration of thought on Hanuman, and finding him 
451 2G 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
incapable of being slain, he began to consider how he could be 
bound fast and that most experienced of warriors, full of 
exceeding energy, discharged that powerful weapon conferred 
on him by Brahma on that illustrious monkey. Knowing him 
to be incapable of being slain, Indrajita, skilled in strategy, 
bound that offspring of the Wind-god with the aid of that 
weapon. 
Struck by the titan with the Brahma-weapon, that monkey 
fell to the earth unconscious, but knowing himself to be bound 
by a shaft belonging to the Lord, he did not experience the least 
pain and though bereft of strength, that monkey bethought 
himself of Brahma's blessing. Then that heroic monkey 
began to recollect the boons conferred on him by Brahma 
and thinking of that weapon bestowed by the Self-create, 
consecrated by mantras, he reflected : " I may not release 
myself from these bonds in virtue of the power of that Guru 
of the World. Further, this subjugation has been ordained 
by Him and must be endured by me." 
Thereupon, reflecting on the power of that weapon and the 
compassion of the Grandsire of the World towards him, also 
of the possibility of deliverance, that monkey submitted himself 
to Brahma's decree. 
He thought: "Though made fast by this weapon, I experi ence no fear ; the Grandsire of the World, Mahendra and 
Anila will protect me ; in sooth I deem it to be to mine advantage 
to fall into the hands of the titans and thus come face to face 
with their great king, therefore let mine enemies take me 
captive ! " 
Having thus resolved, that destroyer of his foes, full of 
circumspection, lay motionless and being ruthlessly pinioned 
by the titans, he responded to their threats and abuses by 
leonine roars. Beholding that subduer of his foes lying 
motionless, the titans bound him with plaited ropes of hemp 
and bark and he willingly allowed himself to be tied and in sulted by his foes in order that he might converse with the 
King of the Titans, should he, out of curiosity, desire to see 
him. Bound with ropes, the monkey was no longer under 
the sway of the Brahma-weapon, for, he being secured by 
other bonds, it was rendered void. Beholding that excellent 
452 
SUNDARA KANDA 
monkey bound with bark, the valiant Indrajita recognised him 
to be freed from that supernatural weapon and became pensive, 
saying aloud : — 
"Alas, those titans have rendered my exploit useless, not 
being conversant with the power of mantras and that Brahma weapon being rendered void, no other is effective, thus we are 
all placed in a great predicament for this weapon may not be 
loosed twice." 
Though delivered from the power of that weapon, Hanuman 
betrayed it by no sign, despite the suffering caused by the 
fetters that bound him and he allowed himself to be ill-treated 
by the titans and assaulted by those cruel demons who struck 
him with their fists and dragged him before Ravana. Freed 
from the Brahma-weapon, yet bound by hempen ropes, that 
powerful and heroic monkey was paraded by Indrajita before 
Ravana and his court. And those titans related to the king 
everything concerning that foremost of monkeys, who re sembled a maddened elephant that has been bound. 
On seeing the foremost of monkeys made captive, those war like titans enquired saying: — "Who is this? Who has sent 
him ? From whence has he come ? What is his mission ? 
Who are his supporters ? " and others exclaimed angrily : 
" Kill him ! Burn him ! Devour him ! " 
Having come some way, Hanuman observed elderly attend ants seated at the feet of their sovereign and he gazed with 
admiration on the palace decorated with gems. 
Then the exceedingly powerful Ravana beheld that foremost 
of monkeys dragged hither and thither by those hideous titans, 
and Hanuman gazed at the Lord of the Titans, who was like 
unto a blazing sun in his might and glory. 
Seeing Hanuman, that Ten-headed One issued orders to his 
chief ministers, distinguished for their lineage and character, 
who stood before him and commanded them to interrogate 
that monkey. Thereupon, questioned in turn by them 
concerning the purpose of his coming, Hanuman answered : — 
" I am a messenger, I come from King Sugriva." 
453 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 49 
His Astonishment on beholding Ravana 
Pondering on the exploits of that one of exceeding prowess, 
Hanuman gazed with wonder on the King of the Titans, 
whose eyes were red with anger and who was blazing with 
rare and dazzling gold, adorned with a splendid diadem studded 
with pearls and excellent ornaments of diamonds and precious 
stones created by the power of concentrated thought. Attired 
in costly linen, daubed with red sandalpaste painted with 
variegated devices, he looked splendid with his reddened eyes, 
fierce gaze, brilliant sharp teeth and protruding lips. 
To that monkey, that Ten-Headed One, who was resplendent 
and of great energy, resembled the Mandara Mountain with its 
summits infested with innumerable snakes or a mass of blue 
antimony. A string of pearls gleaming on his breast, his 
countenance possessing the lustre of the full moon, he resembled 
a cloud illumined by the rising sun. With his great arms 
laden with bracelets, smeared with sandal paste, his fingers, 
like five-headed serpents covered with sparkling rings, he was 
seated on a superb and marvellously inlaid crystal throne 
studded with gems and covered with rich hangings. Women, 
sumptuously attired, surrounded him, chowries in their hands 
and he was attended by four experienced counsellors, Durdhara, 
Prahasta, Mahaparshwa and the minister Nikumbha who stood 
round him like the four seas surrounding the earth ; and 
other counsellors too waited upon him as do the Gods on 
their King. 
Then Hanuman gazed on the Lord of the Titans, clothed in 
extreme splendour, resembling the peak of Mount Mem 
surrounded by thunder clouds and, though suffering at the 
hands of those titans of dreadful prowess, Hanuman experienced 
extreme astonishment at the sight of that monarch and be holding the effulgence of that Lord of the Titans, dazzled by 
his magnificence, he became absorbed in thought. 
454 
SUNDARA KANDA 
' What splendour, what power, what glory, what majesty, 
he reflected, ' nothing is lacking ! Were he not evil, this 
mighty monarch of the titans could be the protector of the 
celestial realm and Indra himself, but his cruel and ruthless 
deeds, abhorrent to all, render him the scourge of the worlds 
as also of the Gods and demons ; in bis anger he could make 
an ocean of the earth ! * 
Such were the diverse thoughts of that sagacious monkey 
on beholding the immeasurable power and might of the King 
of the Titans. 
CHAPTER 50 
Hanuman is questioned by the Titans 
Beholding that tawny-eyed one standing before him, the 
mighty-armed Ravana, the terror of the worlds, was seized 
with violent rage. Gazing on that lion among monkeys 
radiating splendour, his mind filled with apprehension, he 
reflected : — 
" Is this the blessed Nandi, who has come hither, he who 
formerly cursed me when, on Mount Kailasha, he became the 
object of my mockery ? Or is he perchance Vana Bali's son 
in the form of a monkey." 
His eyes red with anger, the king then addressed the fore most of bis counsellors, Prahasta, in words that were opportune 
and fraught with good sense, saying : — 
" Demand of this perverse wretch, whence he has come, for 
what reason he laid waste the grove and why he slew the 
titans ? What is his purpose in entering this impregnable 
citadel and why did he attack my retainers ? Interrogate this 
scoundrel concerning these matters ! " 
At these words of Ravana, Prahasta said to Hanuman : — 
" O Monkey, be of good courage, thou hast nought to fear ! 
If it be Indra who has sent thee to Ravana's abode, tells us 
frankly ! Have no anxiety, thou shalt be liberated ! If thou 
art from Vaishxavana, Yama or Varuna and have penetrated 
into our city disguising thy real form or if thou hast been 
455 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
dispatched by Vishnu, hungry for conquest, then tell us. 
Thy form alone is that of a monkey, not thy prowess. Unfold 
all this unto us faithfully, O Monkey and thou shalt instantly 
regain thy freedom but if thou liest, thou shalt pay for it with 
thy life ! Therefore tell us why thou hast entered Havana's 
abode." 
Thus addressed, the foremost of monkeys answered the Lord 
of the Titans, saying : — 
" I am not from Shakra nor Yama nor Varuna nor am I 
allied to Kuvera nor am I sent by Vishnu. I am truly a 
monkey as I appear to be, who have come here in order to 
behold the King of the Titans and for this purpose I destroyed 
the grove. To preserve my life I fought with the titans who, 
full of valour, presented themselves before me. Neither 
weapons nor chains can subdue me, even those of the Gods 
and titans themselves, I having received this boon from the 
Grandsire of the World. It was because I desired to see the 
king that I suffered myself to be overcome by the Brahma weapon. Though I was not under the spell of that weapon, 
yet I permitted the titans to capture me in order to further 
Rama's design for which purpose I have entered the king's 
presence. Knowing me to be the messenger of Raghava, 
whose power is limitless, listen to my words, which will prove 
to thine advantage, O Lord." 
CHAPTER 5 I 
His Words 
Seeing the mighty ten-headed Ravana, that intrepid monkey 
addressed him fearlessly, in words fraught with penetration, 
saying : — 
" I have come here at the command of Sugriva, O Lord of 
the Titans ! As a brother, that Sovereign of the Monkeys 
offers salutations to thee. Hear the counsel of a brother, the 
magnanimous Sugriva j his words are in accord with justice, 
advantageous and salutary both in this world and hereafter. 
King Dasaratha, the master of chariots, elephants and 
horses, in splendour equal to Indra, was the friend of all and 
456 
SUNDARA KANDA 
like unto a father to his subjects. His eldest son, mighty-armed, 
the darling of his sire, at his command, entered the Dandaka 
Forest with his brother Lakshmana and his consort Sita. His 
name is Rama and he is exceedingly valiant and ever abides 
in the path of virtue. His faithful consort, Sita, the illustrious 
daughter of the high-souled Janaka, King of Videha, vanished 
in the forest of Janasthana. Seeking for that princess, the 
king's son with his younger brother came to Rishyamuka 
and met with Sugriva. That King of the Monkeys promised 
to undertake the search for Sita and Rama agreed to aid him 
in recovering the monkey kingdom. Thereupon, slaying Bali 
in combat, that king's son established Sugriva on the throne, 
as lord of all the bears and monkeys. Bali, that bull among 
monkeys, formerly known to thee, was slain by Rama with 
a single arrow in the fight, whereupon the Lord of the Monkeys, 
Sugriva, true to his vow, eager to rind Sita, dispatched monkeys 
in all directions. Hundreds, thousands and millions of monkeys 
are exploring every region high and low, even up to the heavens 
and some resemble Vainataya and some the wind and those 
highly energetic monkeys course hither and thither without 
rest, incapable of being stayed. I am named Hanuman, the 
beloved son of Maruta and, in order to find Sita, I have crossed 
four hundred miles of sea. Having passed over the ocean, 
wandering through thy palace, 1 observed Janaka's daughter. 
" It does not become thee, who art conversant with what is 
meet and proper and hast enriched thyself by thy penances, 
to bear away another's wife, O Eminently Sagacious One. 
Intelligent beings, such as thou, should not commit acts 
prohibited by the law of righteousness which lead to ruin ! 
Who, even among the Gods and titans, can withstand the shafts 
loosed by Lakshmana or those of Raghava in his wrath ? Nay, 
in the Three Worlds, there is none who may affront Rama 
with impunity. Following the path of duty and profit, do thou 
ponder these words fraught with advantage to thee in the 
three divisions of time and restore Janaki to Rama, that lion 
among men ! 
" I have seen Sita and achieved that which was difficult to 
compass, as for what remaineth to be done, Rama himself shall 
accomplish it. I have beheld her in thine abode, suffering 
457 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
grievously ; thou art seemingly unaware that thou harbourest 
a five-headed serpent in thy mansion. Even as food mixed 
with poison may not be digested even by Gods or titans, so 
is she. It is not worthy of thee to bring to nought that merit 
acquired by extreme mortification, as also a long and prosperous 
life. Thou deemest thyself by thy penances, to have won 
immunity from death even from Gods, Immortals or titans, 
but Sugriva is neither a God nor an Immortal nor a titan. 
Raghava, O King, is a mortal and Sugriva, the Lord of Monkeys, 
therefore how wilt thou preserve thy life ? The fruits of virtue 
do not blend with those of vice nor does equity destroy iniquity, 
Till to-day thou hast plucked the fruit of thy merits but soon 
thou wilt reap the fruit of thine evil deeds. Having learnt of 
the destruction of Janasthana, the death of Bali and the 
alliance of Rama and Sugriva ; ponder on these things to 
thine own advantage. I am undoubtedly able to destroy 
Lanka with its horses, chariots and elephants single-handed 
yet I have not received the mandate to do so. In the presence 
of the troops of monkeys and bears, Rama vowed to slay his 
foes, those who bore Sita away. Assuredly, in doing injury 
to Rama, even Indra himself could not dwell in peace, how 
much less one like thee. This Sita, who is known to thee 
and who stays in thine abode is the night of death that will 
bring about thine end and that of Lanka. Beware of placing 
thy neck in the noose of death in the form of Sita. Consider 
how thou mayest save thyself. Thou shall behold this mar vellous city with its palaces and highways consumed by Ska's 
power and the flames fed by Rama's wrath. Do not therefore 
abandon friends, ministers, kinsfolk, brothers, sons, servants, 
wives and Lanka to this fate. O Indra among Titans, follow 
this good counsel since it is offered to thee by one who is a 
monkey, the servant and messenger of Rama. 
" Having wholly annihilated the worlds and their inhabitants 
with all that moves or does not move, the illustrious Raghava 
could re-create them all. Among the chiefs of the Gods, 
Titans, Yakshas, Danavas, Nagas, Vidyadharas, Gandharvas, 
wild beasts, Siddhas Kinneras or birds, in no way nor any where, at no time, among any beings, has any been found, 
who could stand against Rama whose valour is equal to Vishnu's. 
458 
SUNDARA KANDA 
Since thou hast offered that lion among kings, Rama, this 
affront, thy life is forfeit ! 
" Devas, Daityas, Gandharvas, Vidyadharas, Nagas and 
Yakshas are all unable to hold their own in combat with Rama, 
the Protector of the Three Worlds, O King of the Titans ! 
Even were it the Four-headed Brahma, Swyambhu Himself 
or the Three-eyed Rudra, the destroyer of Tripura, or the 
mighty Indra, Chief of the Gods, not one of them could with stand Raghava in the field.'* 
Hearing this distasteful yet excellent speech of that bold 
and fearless monkey, the Ten-Necked One, his eyes rolling in 
anger, ordered him to be put to death. 
chapter 52 
Bibtshana pleads for Hanuman 
Hearing the words of that high-souled monkey, Ravana, in a 
transport of fury, ordered him to be put to death. This decree 
however, issued by the King of the Titans in his perversity 
on one who had proclaimed himself to be a messenger, did not 
meet with the approval of Bibishana. 
Knowing that Lord of the Titans to be exceeding wrath 
and the affair about to be concluded, that prince, firm in 
justice, began to consider what should now be done and that 
subduer of his foes, having resolved how to act, addressed his 
elder brother in words which were essentially true and mild, 
saying : — 
" O King of the Titans, control thine anger and with a 
tranquil mind hear me, extend thy favour to me. Righteous 
monarchs, being conversant with the laws of cause and effect, 
do not take the life of a messenger. O Valiant Prince, it is 
contrary to justice, opposed to social usage, and unworthy of thee 
to bring about the death of this monkey. Thou art versed in 
the moral code, dost recognise an obligation, canst distinguish 
between high and low, dost carry out thy kingly duties and art 
aware of the ultimate purpose of life. If the wise, such as 
459 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
thou, suffer themselves to be mastered by anger, then the 
study of the scriptures is only a weariness of the flesh. Be 
pacified therefore, O Slayer of thine Enemies, O Unconquerable 
Sovereign of the Titans and consider what is meet and just 
in dealing out punishment to a foe." 
Hearing Bibishana's words, Ravana, the Lord of the Titans, 
in a violent rage, answered him saying : — 
" O Scourge of Thy Foes, to slay an evil-doer is no sin, 
therefore I shall make an end of this worker of iniquity." 
Hearing this infamous and unscrupulous speech, essentially 
perverse, Bibishana, who was the foremost of those endowed 
with wisdom, answered in words fraught with integrity, 
saying : — 
" O Lord of Lanka, King of all the Titans, be gracious unto 
me and listen to that which embodies the significance of virtue 
and profit. Under no conditions is an envoy put to death, 
this is the unanimous verdict of the good. Undoubtedly this 
is a formidable adversary and he has inflicted immeasurable 
injury on us, yet men of honour do not sanction the slaying of 
a messenger though innumerable punishments have been 
ordained for them. Mutilation of the body, the whip, stripes, 
shaving of the head, branding, one or all of these may be 
inflicted on a messenger but of punishment by death, none 
has ever heard. How can a hero such as thou art, whose 
mind is swayed by a sense of duty and who is discriminating 
and conversant with what is noble and ignoble, suffer himself 
to be overcome by anger ? The virtuous do not give way to 
wrath ! Thou hast no equal among those who rule over a 
people and thou art able to comprehend the import of the 
scriptures ; thou surpasseth the titans and the Gods. In vincible to the Gods and titans who are endowed with prowess, 
martial ardour and intelligence, thou hast oft-times in battle 
routed the King of the Celestials and other monarchs. Fools 
who, even in thought seek to injure thee, who art a great and 
intrepid warrior, who hast fought with Daityas and Dcvas, 
heroic, intrepid and unconquerable, are already deprived of 
their lives. I see no justification for putting this monkey to 
death. It is on those who sent him, that the punishment 
should fall. Whether he be honest or not, the responsibility 
460 
SUNDARA KANDA 
rests with them. Advocating another's interests and dependent 
on them, an envoy does not merit death. Further if this one 
be killed, no other sky-ranger may present himself to us, 
therefore, O Conqueror of Hostile Citadels, do not seek to 
take his life ; direct thine efforts against the Gods and their 
leader. O Thou who lovest warfare, if he be slain, I see none 
who can incite those two haughty princes to take arms against 
thee. It is not fitting for thee, whom the Gods and titans 
cannot conquer, to rob the Nairritas, whose delight thou art, of 
the opportunity of witnessing that encounter ! They are 
devoted to thy welfare, courageous, disciplined warriors 
distinguished for their great qualities, intelligent, renowned 
for their burning ardour and fine bearing. Therefore let 
some of these, setting out under thine orders to-day, seize 
those two princes and establish thy supremacy among thy 
foes." 
On this, Ravana, that sagacious Lord of the Titans, the 
formidable foe of the celestial realm, recognised the wisdom 
of the inspired words uttered by bis younger brother. 
chapter 53 
Hanuman is led bound through the City 
Hearing the words of his high-souled brother, spoken in 
consonance with time and place, Dashagriva answered him 
saying : — 
" Thou hast spoken truly, the slaying of a messenger is to 
be deprecated, it is therefore necessary to inflict some punish ment other than death on him. In the case of monkeys, the 
tail is unquestionably the most cherished embellishment, 
therefore let it be set on fire and, having been burnt let him go, 
whereafter his friends, kinsfolk and allies as all those dear to 
him shall behold him degraded and mutilated.*' 
Then the Lord of the Titans issued this command : 
" With his tail in flames, let him be led through the city of 
Lanka and its highways." 
461 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Hearing his words, the titans in their savage fury began to 
wrap the tail of Hanuman in cotton rags and thus swathed, 
that colossal monkey increased in size like unto a fire in a 
forest fed by dry wood. And having soaked the cloths in oil, 
the titans set them on fire and Hanuman, filled with rage and 
indignation, his face shining like the rising sun, lashed out at 
them with his blazing tail, whereupon that lion among monkeys 
was secured more tightly by the assembled demons. Accom panied by women, children and the aged, those rangers of the 
night gathered to enjoy the spectacle and the valiant Hanuman, 
who was bound, began to reflect on the matter and thought 
to himself: — 
" Assuredly, though fettered, the titans are not able to 
prevent me from breaking my bonds and leaping amongst them 
creating fresh carnage, still it is in the interest of my master 
that I have taken this journey and it is under the orders of their 
lord that they have bound me, I shall not therefore resist 
them. From the point of view of stature, I am well able to 
engage all these titans in battle but for love of Rama I shall 
suffer this outrage. I shall survey Lanka anew, since during 
the night I was not able to view the fortifications, it proving 
too difficult. The night having passed I shall behold Lanka 
by day. Let them bind me anew; even though they inflict 
pain on me by the burning of my tail, my mind is not troubled." 
Meanwhile the titans seizing hold of that great monkey of 
formidable aspect who was full of courage, an elephant among 
apes, exultant, advanced joyfully, proclaiming his misdeeds 
with conches and trumpets and those demons of cruel exploits 
dragged Hanuman, the conqueror of his foes, through the city, 
he willingly submitting himself to them. 
Thereupon, passing through the titan's capital, that greaj 
monkey surveyed those marvellous palaces, covered highways, 
well laid out squares and streets flanked with mansions and 
cross roads, lanes and alleys, as also the interior of the dwellings 
and on the terraces and roads and along the royal highways all 
those titans cried out : " This is a spy ! " 
Then those hideous titan women informed the divine Sita 
of these unpleasant tidings, saying : — " O Sita, that red-faced 
monkey, who had converse with thee, is being led through the 
462 
SUNDAVA KANDA 
streets, his tail ablaze." And hearing those words, Vaidehi 
remembering her own abduction, overcome with grief, having 
duly purified herself, called upon that God who nourishes 
himself on the sacrifices and urgently implored him to show 
his favour to that mighty monkey. And the large-eyed Sita, 
standing before the fire said : ** If I am possessed of true 
devotion to my lord and have practised penances, if I have 
been a chaste wife, then do thou prove cool to this monkey. 
If the sagacious Rama still has any compassion for me, if my 
merits are not wholly exhausted, then do not burn Hanuman." 
Whereupon Anala of ardent rays, as if communicating with 
that lady, whose eyes were like a doe's, blazed up and, at the 
same time, Hanuman's sire, in order to please that goddess, 
blew on that flaming tail with ice-cold breath and the monkey, 
whose tail was ablaze, thought : — " How is it that this fire, 
blazing up, does not burn me ? I see a great flame, yet feel 
no pain, even as if the snow had fallen upon it. In sooth 
this is a wonder due to Rama's power which I witnessed when 
crossing the main. If the ocean and the virtuous Mainaka acted 
in such a manner, in reverence for him, what will the God of 
Fire not do ? It is on account of Sita's virtue, Raghava's power 
and my sire's affection for me, that Pavaka does not burn me." 
Thereafter that elephant among monkeys reflected : — 
" Why should a warrior such as I, suffer himself to be bound 
by these vile titans ? It is meet that I should manifest my 
valour and avenge myself ! " 
Then that impetuous and mighty monkey snapped his bonds 
and springing into the air uttered a shout and that offspring 
of the Wind-god reached the gate of the city which was as 
high as the peak of a mountain and where no titans were to be 
found. Then, he who resembled a great hill, assumed a 
diminutive form and casting off his fetters became free, where upon he expanded to the size of a mountain once more. Look ing about him he observed an iron bar lying at the gate and the 
long-armed Maruti, seizing hold of that weapon, employed it 
for slaying the guards. Having destroyed them, in his ardour, 
that one of exceeding prowess, with the burning plume of 
his tail resembling an aureole, looking like the glorious sun 
surrounded by rays, cast his eyes over Lanka. 
463 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 54 
He sets fire to Lanka 
Surveying Lanka, that monkey, having attained his purpose, 
began to consider what he should do further and reflected in 
himself: — "What more remains for me to do to afflict the 
titans ? The grove laid waste, those vile titans slain, a part of 
the army destroyed, nothing is left for me but to demolish 
their citadel. With their fort destroyed, it were easy to bring 
my labours to an end ; with a little effort I can complete my 
task and obtain the price of my trouble. The Bearer of 
Sacrificial Offerings that flames on my tail must be propitiated 
by me, I shall therefore burn up these excellent buildings." 
Thereat, with his tail in flames, which lent him the appear ance of a cloud charged with lightning, that great monkey 
began to range the roofs of the dwellings of Lanka. Glancing 
round, passing from mansion to mansion, with a calm mind he 
encircled those stately edifices and gardens and leaping im petuously towards the palace of Prahasta, that one of exceeding 
prowess in strength resembling the wind, set fire to it. There after the mighty Hanuman bounded to the mansion of Maha parshwa lighting a fire equal to that at the end of the world. 
Then that monkey of immense energy leapt on the residence of 
Vajradanshtra and on those belonging to Shuka and the in telligent Sarana. In the same way that leader of monkeys 
burnt down the habitations of Indrajita, Jambumalin and 
Sumali and those of the titans Rashmiketu, Suryashatru, 
Hrasvakarna, Damshtra, Romasha, Yuddhonmatta, Matta, 
Dwajagriva, Vidyujjihva and Hastimukha and the dwellings 
of Karala, Vishala, Shonitaksha, Kumbhakarna, Maharaksba, 
those of Narantaka, Kumbha, Nikumbha and the magnanimous 
Yajnashatru and Brahmasharru. 
That mighty bull among monkeys thereafter set fire to the 
accumulated treasure of those affluent titans and having passed 
4«4 
SUNDARA KANDA 
over the other dwellings that powerful and auspicious one 
approached the residence of the King of Titans. Then the 
virtuous Hanuman, emitting loud cries, resembling a cloud at 
the dissolution of the world, with the tip of his blazing tail 
set fire to that foremost of buildings decorated with every 
variety of gems resembling Mount Meru or Mandara, en riched with sumptuous decoration. 
Fanned by the wind, the flames spread everywhere, casting 
livid gleams like the Fires of Time and those palaces, en riched with gold, decorated with pearls and gems, richly 
bejewelled, toppled to earth, crumbling to dust like the mansions 
of the Celestials, who have fallen from heaven their merit 
exhausted. Then there arose a mighty uproar among the 
titans, who fled in all directions unable to preserve their dwell ings, bereft of their treasure, crying out : — " Verily it is the 
God of Fire himself in the form of a monkey ! " 
Some of the titan women with babies at their breasts 
ran shrieking from their homes and some, enveloped in flames, 
their hair in disorder, fell from the high balconies like flashes 
of lightning in the sky. And Hanuman saw various metals 
flowing in a molten mass, mixed with diamonds, coral, emeralds, 
pearls and silver, streaming from the palaces and, as fire is not 
sated in consuming wood and straw, neither did Hanuman 
weary of slaying those leaders of titans nor the earth from 
receiving their corpses. As Rudra consumed the Demon 
Tripura so did that impetuous and mighty monkey burn up 
Lanka and, from the summit of that mountain where Lanka 
stood, that dreadful conflagration kindled by the intrepid 
Hanuman shot forth in tongues of flame. Resembling the 
fires at the destruction of the world, the smokeless conflagration, 
lit by Maruta blazed up to the skies aided by the wind, feeding 
on the dwellings of the titans and their bodies like 
sacrificial offerings and, with the fierce ardour of a million 
suns, it consumed Lanka wholly as with increasing volume 
the fire cleaves the mundane Egg with a sound resembling 
innumerable thunderclaps. That fire of incalculable fury, 
rising into the sky, with its flames resembling Kimshuka 
flowers, its clouds of smoke like unto the blue lotus, looked 
exceedingly beautiful. 
465 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
" Verily this is the God who bears the thunderbolt, Mahendra, 
the Chief of the Thirty or Yama or Varuna or Anila. This is 
no monkey but the God of Death himself who has come ! 
Or perchance it is a manifestation of Brahma's wrath, the four faced God who, in the form of a monkey has come hither to 
destroy the titans or is it the supreme power of Vishnu, un imaginable, unutterable, infinite and unsurpassed, which, by 
his Maya, has assumed the form of a monkey ? " 
Thus did the chief titans speak, being assembled and, seeing 
their city suddenly consumed by fire with its inhabitants, 
horses, chariots, flocks of birds, beasts and trees they 
began to lament, crying : — " O My Father, O My beloved 
Son, O My dear One, O My Friend ! Woe, alas ! O My Lord, 
our spiritual merit is exhausted ! " Thus amidst, a frightful 
clamour, did the titans cry aloud, and Lanka, encircled with 
flames, her heroes slain, her warriors succumbing to the swift 
wrath of Hanuman, appeared to have fallen under a curse. 
In the midst of the tumult Hanuman with pride, surveyed 
Lanka bearing the marks of that violent blaze and its terror stricken demons as Swyambhu surveys the final destruction of 
the world. 
Having demolished the grove planted with rare trees and 
slain those powerful titans in combat and burned that city 
filled with splendid palaces, that monkey born of Favana 
rested. 
Having dispatched those titans in great numbers, destroyed 
the dense woods and spread the fire amongst the titan dwell ings, the illustrious Hanuman became absorbed in the thought 
of Rama. 
Thereupon all the Celestials lauded that prince among monkey 
warriors endowed with immense energy, equal to Maruta in 
swiftness, that sagacious and excellent son of Vayu. And all 
the Gods, the foremost of the Ascetics, the Gandharvas, 
Vidyadharas, Pannagas and Bhutas experienced an exceeding 
and indescribable joy. 
And having devastated the forest, slain the titans in conflict 
and burnt the great city of Lanka, that mighty monkey, seated 
on the roof of the foremost of buildings, spreading the rays of 
his flaming tail like a aureole, resembled the sun encircled with 
466 
SUNDARA KANDA 
a nimbus. Then having consumed the city of Lanka, that great 
monkey quenched the fire of his tail in the sea. 
Beholding Lanka consumed by fire, the Gods, Gandharvas, 
Siddhas and great ascetics were struck with amazement. 
chapter 55 
Hanuman's Anxiety concerning Sita 
Seeing Lanka consumed by fire and that city with its terror stricken titans filled with tumult, the monkey Hanuman 
became thoughtful and a great anxiety invaded his mind. 
He reflected : — " In burning Lanka, I have without doubt 
done something reprehensible ! Blessed are those great souls, 
who, in their wisdom extinguish the anger born within them 
as a fire is quenched by water. What evil is not committed by 
those who give way to wrath? In anger one may even slay 
one's spiritual preceptor ; nor does he who is enraged, refrain 
from affronting virtuous men. He who gives way to wrath 
is unable to discriminate as to when it is fitting to speak or 
when to be silent ; there is no iniquity that cannot be per petrated by him. He is truly said to be a man, who, con trolling himself, subdues the anger rising within him as a 
snake casts off its slough. Woe is me, wretched and shameless 
doer of evil that I am, who, forgetting Sita, have slain my lord 
by fire. Should that noble daughter of Janaka have perished 
in this conflagration, which has wholly consumed the city of 
Lanka, I have frustrated the purpose of my master ; Sita 
having been burnt, I have marred my lord's design. To 
burn down Lanka is a trifling occurrence, but suffering myself 
to be overcome by anger I have cut at the very root of my 
mission. Assuredly Janaki has perished for there remains no 
corner of Lanka that has not been laid waste, the entire city 
lies in ashes. Since I have sacrified everything through my 
lack of understanding, I shall yield up my life this instant, 
either I shall throw myself into the fire or into the jaws of 
Vadava, or give my body to the denizens of the deep. Living, 
I am not able to face the King of the Monkeys or those two 
4*7 «H 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
tigers among men, having marred their purpose. Through my 
culpable anger I have manifested my undisciplined simian 
nature to the Three Worlds. Woe to the unbridled passion, 
uncurbed and unrestrained, under which I failed to protect 
Sita when it was in my power to do so. She, having perished, 
those two heroes will die also and on their ceasing to exist, 
Sugriva will yield up his life with all his kinsfolk. On hearing 
these tidings, how shall the virtuous Bharata, devoted to his 
brother or Shatrughna, survive? Then on the extinction of 
the illustrious race of Ikshwaku, their subjects will be overcome 
with grief. 
" Unfortunate am I, whose merits have been annulled 
through being false to the ties of duty and advantage, suffering 
myself to be dominated by a corrupting passion, thus becoming 
the destroyer of creatures ! " 
Immersed in these melancholy reflections, Hanuman re collected certain auspicious signs that he had previously 
observed and said to himself: — ■
" Is it possible that that Lovely One, protected by her own 
spiritual merit, has happily escaped death ? Fire cannot burn 
fire ! Nay, Pavaka would not dare to approach that virtuous 
one, preserved by her own purity, who is the consort of one of 
immeasurable glory. That Bearer of Sacrificial Offerings has 
not burned me owing to Rama's power and the virtue of 
Vaidehi. How should she therefore, the object of worship of 
those three brothers, Bharata and the others and the beloved 
of Rama's heart, perish ? Since it is the nature of fire to burn, 
he who reigns invincible as master everywhere yet who has 
not burned my tail, why should he consume that exalted One ? " 
Thereafter Hanuman remembered with wonder how the 
Mainaka bill had appeared to him in the ocean and he reflected: 
" By virtue of her asceticism, sincerity and undeviating devotion 
to her lord, she is able to consume fire itself but it cannot 
consume her." 
Pondering thus on the magnitude of the divine Sita's 
spiritual merit, Hanuman heard the high-souled Charanas 
conversing thus : — 
"Assuredly Hanuman has accomplished a difficult feat in 
igniting a fierce and terrible fire in the dwellings of the titans. 
468 
SUNDARA KANDA 
The hosts of women, children and the aged are fleeing away 
and the tumult re-echoes as in a cavern ; the city of Lanka 
with its towers, walls and gateways is wholly consumed but 
Janaki still lives, a great wonder ! " 
Such were the words, resembling ambrosia, which fell on 
Hanuman's ears and from that instant, happiness flooded his 
heart once more. On account of the auspicious portents, his 
own conclusions, the merits of Sita and the words of the saints, 
Hanuman was delighted beyond measure. Thereupon that 
monkey, having attained his end, knowing the princess to be 
safe, resolved to leave Lanka after seeing her once more. 
chapter 56 
He takes leave of Sita 
Paying obeisance to Janaki seated at the foot of the Shimshapa 
tree, Hanuman said to her : " By the grace of heaven I find 
thee unharmed ! " 
Looking on him again and again as he stood ready to depart, 
Sita, inspired by conjugal affection, said to him : — 
" If, O Child, thou judgest it opportune, then, O Irre proachable Friend, remain here in some hidden spot to-day; 
to-morrow, having rested, do thou set out. Thy proximity, 
O Monkey, will make me forget mine overwhelming grief 
awhile. Thou wilt go, O Great Monkey and it is doubtful 
whether I shall still be living on thy return, O Foremost of 
Monkeys ! In thine absence my torments will increase and 
falling into one misfortune after another, I shall be consumed 
with grief and sorrow. Further, O Hero, this fear is ever 
present with me ; how will the most valiant Sugriva or that 
host of bears and monkeys cross the impassable ocean or 
those two sons of men supported by those powerful monkeys ? 
Three beings alone are able to bound over the deep, Vainateya, 
thou and Maruta. 
" In the face of this insurmountable obstacle, in thy con summate experience dost thou see any possibility of success ? 
4*9 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
0 Destroyer of Hostile Warriors, thou alone art competent to 
perform this task, thou shalt attain renown by thy prowess ; 
yet, if Kakutstha, the scourge of his foes were able to lay 
Lanka waste with his forces and bear me away, it would be 
worthy of him. Therefore do that which will enable the 
magnanimous Rama to manifest his prowess in conformity 
with a warrior's nature." 
Hearing these words full of loving solicitude, reason and 
significance, the valiant Hanuman answered : — 
" O Noble Lady, that lord and foremost of monkeys, Sugriva, 
endowed with power, has resolved to deliver thee. Attended 
by thousands of billions of powerful monkeys, he will not delay 
in coming hither, O Vaidehi, and those foremost of men, the 
flower of the human race, Rama and Lakshmana, coming here, 
will afflict Lanka with their arrows. Having destroyed the 
titans and their adherents, the son of Raghu, O Exceedingly 
Fair One, shall bear thee away and bring thee to his capital. 
Take heart, therefore, O Gentle One and await that hour ! 
Soon shalt thou see Rama strike down Ravana on the field of 
battle. The Lord of the Titans slain with his sons, ministers 
and people, thou shalt be re-united with Rama, as Rohmi 
with the moon. Ere long Kakutstha will appear accompanied 
by the foremost of monkeys and bears and, triumphing in the 
fight, shall remove thy grief." 
Having thus consoled Vaidehi, Hanuman, born of Maruta, 
prepared to depart, offering salutations to her and, having 
comforted her and displayed his surpassing strength by render ing that city desolate, having thwarted Ravana and exhibited 
his immeasurabke power, Hanuman, paying obeisance to 
Vaidehi, intent on returning, resolved to cross the ocean once 
more. 
Then the repressor of his foes, that powerful monkey, eager 
to see his lord, ascended the foremost of mountains, Arishta, 
covered with dark groves of Fadmaka trees, resembling a 
mantle which, with the clouds clinging to its sides, seemed to 
expand with joy under the sun's rays ; the metals scattered here 
and there appeared to be its eyes and the solemn sound of its 
torrents resembled its voice chanting the Veda; the water Ms, the singing of its song and the tall Devadaru trees caused 
470 
SIUNDARA KANDA 
the mountain to resemble a giant with uplifted arms, the 
thundering of the torrents were its cries re-echoing round 
about and the autumnal woods agitated by the wind made it 
appear as if it trembled ; as the breeze whistled through the 
reeds, it seemed to be piping while great and venomous ser pents created the illusion of its hissing in anger. With its 
ravines shrouded in mist, investing it with a solemn air, as if it 
were deeply absorbed in contemplation and the clouds moving 
here and there on its slopes lending it the appearance of walking; 
with its peaks towering heavenwards, so that it appeared to be 
yawning, it was bristling with escarpments and filled with 
innumerable caves. Planted with Sala, Tala. Kharjura, 
Tamala, Kama and Vanisha trees with a myriad creepers laden 
with flowers and abounding in herds of deer and containing 
innumerable streams, with countless crags, rich in minerals, 
intersected by rills, frequented by Maharishis, Yakshas, 
Gandharvas, Kinneras and Uragas, impenetrable on account 
of the thorns and briars, its caves were filled with lions, and 
tigers and other beasts abounded there and that mountain 
was furnished with trees having delicious fruit and roots. 
Then the foremost of monkeys, the son of Anila, ascended 
that mountain burning to behold Rama once more and, wherever 
he placed his foot on those enchanting slopes, the rocks crumbled 
and broke away with a thundering sound. 
Having scaled the Indra of Mountains, that mighty monkey 
gathered up his strength, desirous of crossing from the southern 
to the northern shore of the salty sea and, reaching the summit, 
he beheld that formidable expanse of water inhabited by 
dreadful monsters. Then the son of Maruta, with the swift ness of the wind as it blows through space, leapt from the 
southern region to the northern shore and, pressed under 
foot by that monkey, the mountain giant re-echoing to the 
cries of countless denizens sank into the bosom of the earth 
with its peaks toppling and its trees overturned. Borne down 
by Hanuman's prodigious bounds, trees laden with blossom 
fell to the ground as if struck by Indra's thunderbolt and the 
dreadful roar of great lions lurking in the caverns rent the 
skies as they were crushed by the falling mountain. Vidya dharas, their raiment torn and their ornaments in disorder, 
47i 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
fled in terror from that place and large and powerful serpents, 
filled with poison, shooting out their tongues, lay in coiled 
heaps, their heads and necks crushed. Kinneras, Uragas, 
Gandharvas, Yakshas and Vidyadharas, deserting that mountain, 
returned to the celestial realm and that mighty hill, measuring 
forty miles in extent and thirty in height, was levelled to the 
earth with its trees and lofty summits 
Then that monkey, desirous of crossing over the salty sea, 
whose shores were threatened by the tides, rose into the air. 
chapter 57 
The Return of Hanuman 
Like a winged mountain, with one impetuous bound, Hanuman 
sailed over the airy sea, whose serpents were the Yakshas and 
the full-blown lotuses; the Gandharvas the moon was the 
lily on those enchanting waters, the sun its waterfowl, Tishya 
and Shravana its swans and the clouds its reeds and moss ; 
Pumavasu was the whale and Lohitanga the crocodile ; Airavata 
the spacious island ; Swati, its decoration in the form of a 
swan; the breezes were its billows and the rays of the moon 
its cool and peaceful waves. 
Unwearyingly, Hanuman swallowing up that space adorned 
with the sun and stars, skimmed past the King of the Planets. 
Cleaving the clouds and crossing that ocean without fatigue, he 
beheld great masses of cloud, white, roseate, purple, blue, 
yellow and black, looking exceedingly beautiful and he, 
entering and re-emerging from them, looked like the moon, 
when it is lost to sight and becomes visible again. Coursing 
through those massed clouds in his white attire, that hero 
could at times be seen and again was hidden in the sky, like 
unto the moon. Borne through space, that son of the Wind 
constantly dispersed the groups of clouds, sailing on and on, 
emitting loud roars resembling thunder and, having slain the 
titans, rendered his name famous, laid the city of Lanka waste, 
47a 
SUNDARA KANDA 
harassed Ravana, inflicted defeat on those mighty warriors 
and paid homage to Vaidehi, he was now returning full of 
glory, across the sea. 
And that one endowed with prowess, paid homage to the 
foremost of mountains, Mainaka, as he sped on like an arrow 
loosed from the bowstring. Approaching from afar, he 
observed that lofty Mountain Mahendra, like a great cloud 
and that mighty monkey, having a lusty voice resembling 
thunder, filled the ten cardinal points with his roars. 
Reaching the southern shore, eager to see his friends once 
again, he began to wave his tail to and fro and emit loud cries 
and as he proceeded in the path of Suparna, the clamour rent 
the skies and it appeared as if the firmament and the sun's 
disc were shattered. 
Thereupon those mighty warriors on the northern shore of 
the ocean, anxiously awaiting the Wind-god's offspring, 
heard the sound created by the thighs of Hanuman proceeding 
at great speed, resembling clouds blown by the wind and 
those rangers of the woods, who had been dispirited, heard 
the roars of that monkey which were like unto thunder. Hearing 
that clamour raised by Hanuman, those monkeys who were 
eager to see their friend once again, were gready excited and 
Jambavan, the foremost of the monkeys, his heart exultant, 
addressing them all, spoke thus : — 
" Undoubtedly Hanuman has been wholly successful in his 
enterprise ; if it were not so he would not have raised this 
clamour." 
Thereupon the monkeys, hearing the violent movements of 
that magnanimous one, as also his shouts, highly delighted, 
leapt up and in their joy, bounding from rock to rock and from 
crest to crest, eager to behold Hanuman, climbed to the tops 
of the trees waving their clean apparel. 
And the roaring of the mighty Hanuman, born of Maruta, 
resembled the wind whistling through a mountain gorge. 
Seeing that great ape, who, alighting, shone like a mass of 
clouds, all the monkeys stood before him with joined palms, 
whereupon that valiant monkey, high as a hill, leapt down 
on to the Mahendra Mountain covered with trees and, over flowing with felicity, he alighted on that lofty and enchanting 
473 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
peak, like a winged hill, whose pinions have been dipt and who 
has fallen from the sky. 
Then instantly all the monkeys with glad hearts began to 
gather round the magnanimous Hanuman, encircling him, their 
faces shining with joy, drawing near to him in the excess 
of their felicity. Then offering obeisance to him they brought 
roots and fruits to that greatest of monkeys, born of Maruta. 
In their delight, some emitted shouts of joy and the foremost 
of the monkeys brought branches of trees so that he might 
be seated. 
Meanwhile that mighty ape, Hanuman, paid obeisance to 
his elders and the aged with Jambavan at their head, as well 
as Prince Angada. And honoured by them all, as he had 
merited to be and overwhelmed by courtesies, he informed 
them briefly : — " I have seen the Goddess ! " Then taking 
the hand of Bali's son, he sat down in the enchanting grove on 
the Mahendra Mountain and, questioned by them, he joyfully 
addressed those foremost of monkeys, saying : — 
" In the midst of the Ashoka grove, I observed Janata; 
that irreproachable one is guarded by dreadful titan women. 
That damsel is wearing a single plait of hair and constantly 
sighs for Rama's presence. She is faint on account of fasting, 
stained with dust, emaciated, and wears matted locks." 
Those foremost of monkeys, hearing the words of Maruti : 
" I have seen her ", sweet as Amrita, intoxicated with joy 
began to shout and emitting cries of pleasure raised ululations. 
Some waved their tails to and fro, others raised them up 
lashing them or bounded to the summit and with delight 
touched the fortunate Hanuman, that chief of monkeys. 
And when Hanuman had spoken, Angada, in the midst of 
those valiant monkeys, paid tribute to Hanuman in excellent 
words, saying : — 
" For valour and courage thou hast no equal, O Monkey, 
since thou hast crossed the immense ocean and hast now 
returned. Thou alone hast given us back our lives, O Great 
One. By thy grace, our purpose accomplished, we can rejoin 
Raghava. O What devotion thou hast shown to thy master ! 
What prowess ! What endurance ! By the grace of heaven, 
thou hast seen the divine and glorious consort of Rama. By 
474 
SUNDARA KANDA 
the grace of heaven, Kakutstha will abandon the grief that 
Sita's absence has caused him ! " 
Thereafter, surrounding Angada, Hanuman and Jambavan, 
the monkeys full of joy brought large rocks and, seated thereon, 
eager to hear how he had crossed the main and seen Lanka, 
Sita and Havana, they waited with joined palms, their eyes 
fixed on Maruti. 
And the youthful Angada, surrounded by innumerable 
monkeys, resembled the Chief of the Gods enthroned in 
heaven amidst the myriad hosts. 
When the glorious and renowned Hanuman with the illus- 
trious Angada, who was adorned with bracelets were seated, 
that elevated and mighty peak shone with splendour. 
CHAPTER 58 
Hanuman recounts his Experiences 
Thereafter, on the summit of Mount Mahendra, those 
monkeys, their eyes fixed on the mighty Hanuman were filled 
with delight and when all those high-souled and happy 
monkeys were seated, Jambavan, glad at heart, enquired of the 
great and fortunate offspring of the Wind concerning the 
success of his mission, saying : — 
" How didst thou discover that noble lady ; how doth she 
fare there ; how doth that cruel Ten-headed One bear himself 
towards her ? Do thou truthfully relate all this unto us, O 
Mighty Monkey ! 
" How wast thou able to trace the divine Sita ? What did 
she reply to thine enquiries ? Having learnt all, we can take 
counsel as to what should be done ! Do thou tell us also what, 
on our return, we should say and what we should conceal, 
O Thou who art well able to subdue thyself! " 
Thereupon, that messenger, his hair standing on end with 
joy on hearing these words, inclining his head in token of bis 
reverence for Sita, answered : — 
475 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
" In your presence I leapt from the summit of the Mahendra 
Mountain into space with a concentrated mind, desirous of 
reaching the southern shore of the sea. In my course, a 
formidable obstacle presented itself to my view and I beheld 
a great mountain having a golden peak, divine and splendid, 
which obstructed my path. Approaching the sun-like summit 
of that mighty mountain, reflecting : ' I will shatter this ', I 
struck it with my tail and that peak which shone like the sun, 
broke into a thousand fragments. Seeing its condition, that 
great mountain addressed me in sweet accents, bringing as it 
were refreshment to my soul, and said : 
" ' Know me, O My Son, to be the brother of thy father 
Matarishvat, famed as Mainaka, dwelling in the deep. 
Formerly, all the larger mountains were furnished with wings 
and ranged over the earth causing devastation everywhere. 
Hearing of the conduct of those mountains, Mahendra, that 
blessed One, by whom Faka was chastised, with his thunder bolt severed the wings of those mountains by thousands but 
I was delivered by thine illustrious sire and that high-souled 
Wind-god cast me into the sea, the abode of Varuna. O 
Subduer of thy Foes, I am willing to render assistance to 
Raghava, Rama is the foremost among virtuous men and is as 
powerful as Mahendra himself'. 
" Hearing the words of the magnanimous Mainaka, I con fided my purpose to him and he gave me leave to depart. 
Then, counselling me to proceed, he vanished in his human 
form and in the shape of a mountain became submerged in 
the sea. 
" For a long time I travelled onward with speed till I observed 
the divine Surasa, Mother of Serpents, in the midst of the 
ocean and that Goddess addressed me saying : — 
'"Thou art destined by the Celestials to be my food, O 
Best of Monkeys, I am about to devour thee since thou hast 
been assigned to me'. 
" Hearing this, I, with humility, turning pale, made obeisance 
to her with joined palms and uttered these words : — 
" ' Rama, the fortunate son of Dasaratha, the Scourge of 
his Foes, withdrew to the Dandaka Forest with his brother 
Lakshmana and Sita ; his consort was borne away by the wicked 
47« 
SUNDARA KANDA 
Ravana ; I am proceeding to her on Rama's behest. In this 
matter thou shouldst assist Rama. Having seen Mithila's 
daughter as also her lord of imperishable exploits, I shall 
return and enter thy mouth, this I promise thee '. 
" Thus accosted by me, Surasa, able to change her form at 
will, said : ' None is able to pass by me, this is the boon I 
have received \ 
" Thus addressed by Surasa, I attained the magnitude of 
ten yojanas and then another ten, but her mouth assumed even 
greater proportions. Seeing her jaws thus dilated, I instantly 
assumed a tiny form measuring a thumb's size and quickly 
entered her mouth, emerging immediately, whereupon the 
divine Surasa, taking on her normal shape, said to me : — 
" ' O Best of Monkeys, O Dear One, go, accomplish thy 
mission and restore Vaidehi to the magnanimous Rama. Be 
thou blessed, O Mighty One ! I am pleased with thee ! ' 
" Then all beings praised me saying: * Excellent! Excellent! ' 
and I again leapt into the infinite blue like unto Garuda, 
when suddenly, without anything being visible, my shadow 
was held fast. Stayed in my course, I surveyed the ten car dinal points unable to discover who held me prisoner. Then 
the thought came to me : * What is this obstacle that has 
risen in my path ? X cannot discern its nature ! ' And as I 
looked down bewildered, I beheld a dreadful demon lying in 
the waves, thereupon that monster, laughing scornfully, addressed 
these inauspicious words to me, who though undaunted, 
remained motionless : — 
" ' Whither art thou bound, O Thou of gigantic form ? Do 
thou become my food, who am hungry, and gratify this body 
deprived of sustenance for a long period.' Saying : — ' Be it 
so' I expanded my body to more than the capacity of her 
mouth but she increased the size of her huge and dreadful 
jaws in order to swallow me nor could she comprehend that I 
was able to assume different shapes at will. In the twinkling 
of an eye, abandoning my vast size, I, extracting her heart, 
flew into the sky. 
" Throwing up her arms, that cruel demon sank under the 
salty waves like a mountain, whereupon I heard the har monious voices of those magnanimous beings stationed in the 
477 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
air, saying : — ' That dreadful demon Sinhika has been swiftly 
slain by Hanuman.' 
" That monster destroyed, I recalled to mind the urgency of 
my mission, and the delay that had occurred in discharging it 
and, after traversing a great distance, I beheld the southern 
shore of the ocean and the mountain on which Lanka was 
situated. The sun having set, I penetrated the abode of the 
titans unnoticed by them and, as X did so, a woman resembling 
the clouds at the end of the world period rose before me, 
breaking into laughter. Striking that exceedingly dreadful form, 
having flames for her hair, who had sought to take my life, 
with my left fist I thrust her aside and entered there at dusk, 
whereupon that one, affrighted, addressed me saying : — 
" I am the city of Lanka, O Warrior ! Vanquished have I 
been by thy prowess, thou shalt also triumph over all the titans ! * 
" Meanwhile I sought for Janaka's daughter all through the 
night, penetrating into Ravana's inner apartments, but did not 
find her there. Not rinding Sita in Ravana's palace, I was 
submerged in a sea of sorrow and in the midst of my distress 
I saw an enchanting grove with a mansion surrounded by 
a lofty golden wall. Having scaled that enclosure I beheld a 
grove of Ashoka trees in the midst of which a great Shimshapa 
grew. Ascending it, I observed a thicket of golden aspens and 
hard by the Shimshapa tree, I beheld that supremely beautiful 
one, dark blue of hue, whose eyes resembled lotus petals, clad 
in a single piece of cloth. Emaciated with fasting, her hair 
soiled with dust, Sita, fixed in devotion to her lord, was 
surrounded by cruel and hideous titan women living on 
blood and flesh, as a doe encircled by tigresses. Wearing a 
single plait, absorbed in the thought of her lord, lying on the 
earth, her limbs wasted, she resembled a lotus at the advent of 
winter. Deprived by Ravana of the object of her desire, she 
had resolved to die. 
" Beholding that lady, whose eyes resembled a doe's, the 
illustrious consort of Rama, I remained seated in the Shimshapa 
tree. 
" Thereafter I heard a great clamour mixed with the jingling 
of girdles and anklets, issuing from the palace of Ravana and, 
exceedingly agitated, contracting my body, I concealed myself 
478 
SUNDARA KANDA 
like a bird in die thick foliage of the Shimshapa tree. There upon the mighty Havana accompanied by his consorts came 
to the place where Sita was and, seeing the Lord of the Titans, 
Janaki of lovely hips, shrank into herself, concealing her 
breasts with her arms and, in great dread and extreme con fusion, glancing here and there and finding no refuge, that 
unfortunate being was seized with violent trembling, 
" Then Dashagriva, inclining bis head, bowed to the feet of 
the princess, who was overcome with extreme grief and said 
to her : — 
" * O Fair One, do thou regard me with favour ! If, O Sita, 
through pride, thou dost refuse to honour me, at the end of 
two months I shall drink thy blood ! ' 
" Hearing these words spoken by the wicked Ravana, Janaki 
growing exceedingly wrath, answered with dignity : — 
" ' O Vilest of Titans, having uttered such a speech to the 
consort of Rama of immeasurable prowess, to me, the daughter in-law of Dasaratha of the Ikshwaku line, why has thy tongue 
not fallen out ? O Vile Wretch, great indeed was thy valour 
to bear me hence far from the illustrious Rama, in his absence ! 
Thou art not even worthy to be the slave of Raghava, that 
invincible, loyal, courageous and illustrious warrior ! * 
" Thus addressed in harsh terms, Dashagriva blazed up 
with wrath like a fire on to which a brand has been cast and, 
rolling his eyes in rage, clenching his right fist he prepared 
to strike Mithila's daughter. 
" Then all the titan women cried out : * Hold ! Hold ! * 
and from their midst, the wife of that evil wretch, the lovely 
Mandodari, ran towards him and with gentle words, inspired 
by the love she bore him, contrived to pacify him. 
" She said : — * Thou whose valour is equal to Mahendra's, 
what need hast thou for Sita ? Divert thyself with me, who 
am in no way inferior to her or do thou disport thyself with the 
daughters of the Gods, the Gandharvas or Yakshas. What is 
Sita to thee ? ' 
" Thereafter, that company of women raised up that powerful 
Ranger of the Night and conducted him back to his residence. 
" Ravana having departed, those titan women of hideous 
aspect, railed at Sita in harsh and cruel terms, but Janaki paid 
479 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
no more heed to their speech than to a straw, and their taunts 
were lost on her; and those titan women, who fed on flesh, 
failing in their attempts, informed Ravana of Sita's unconquer able resolution, whilst others, tired of tormenting her, giving 
up hope, exhausted, lay down to rest. 
" And while they slept, Sita, devoted to her lord, gave voice 
to bitter lamentation in the extremity of her distress. 
" Thereafter, rising in their midst, Trijata spoke, saying : — 
" * Devour me this instant, if you will, but do not lay hands 
on the dark-eyed Sita, daughter of Janaka, the virtuous 
daughter-in-law of King Dasaratha. In truth I have had a 
fearful dream, causing the hair to stand on end, presaging the 
destruction of the titans and the triumph of this one's lord. 
It is for us to seek the grace of Vaidehi, who alone I deem, 
can defend us from Raghava. Let us therefore relate this 
dream to her, for one who is the object of such a vision, being 
freed from her distress, will attain the height of felicity. By 
bowing low in submission, we shall earn the favour of Janaki, 
who alone can deliver us from this great peril ! * 
" Thereat that chaste and youthful woman, on hearing of the 
coming victory of her lord, rejoicing, said : — 
" * If Trijata speak truly, then indeed will I protect you all.* 
" Observing Sita's unfortunate plight, I became absorbed in 
thought and my mind was perturbed. Then I cast about as 
to how I might find some means of speaking to Janaki and I 
began to extol the race of Ikshwaku. 
" Hearing the words I uttered embellished with the praises 
of those Rajarishis, that exalted lady, her eyes suffused with 
tears, enquired of me saying : — * Who art thou ; how and on 
whose behest hast thou come hither? From whence comes 
thine attachment to Rama? It behoveth thee to relate all 
to me.* 
"Listening to her speech, I made answer to her in this 
wise: — 
" ' O Goddess ! Rama, thy consort, hath found an ally 
endowed with supreme prowess, named Sugriva, who is the 
redoubtable and powerful King of the Monkeys. Know me 
to be bis servant, Hanuman, who has come hither to thee, 
dispatched by thy lord of imperishable exploits. 0 Illustrious 
480 
SUNDARA KANDA 
Lady, that highly effulgent son of Dasaratha, foremost of men, 
hath sent this ring as a token to thee. O Queen, what is thy 
behest ? Shall I bring thee back to Rama and Lakshmana on 
the northern shore of the ocean ? ' 
" Hearing this, Sita, the delight of Janaka, reflected within 
herself awhile and said : — 
" ' Suffer Raghava to destroy Ravana and himself carry me 
hence.' Inclining my head to that noble and irreproachable 
lady, I requested some token from her which might enhance 
the delight of Raghava, whereupon Sita said to me : — 
" ' Take this excellent jewel for which thou shalt be highly 
regarded by that One of mighty arras.' 
*' Thereupon, that princess of lovely limbs gave me a mar vellous jewel and in a voice strangled with sobs, bade me fare well. I bowed to that daughter of a king with deep respect and, 
circumambulating her began to consider returning home, but she, 
having searched her heart, addressed me once again, saying : — 
" ' O Hanuman, do thou relate my story to Raghava in such 
wise that those two heroes, Rama and Lakshmana, will come 
here instantly accompanied by Sugriva, or else, having but 
two months to live, Kakutstha will see me no more, like one 
without a protector.' 
" Hearing these dreadful words, a wave of anger surged over 
me and I instantly resolved on what I should do. Thereupon, 
expanding my body to the size of a mountain, burning to fight, 
I laid waste the grove. Then all the beasts and birds began 
to flee away in fear and those terrible titan women awoke and 
beheld the devastation. Observing me, they all assembled and 
instantly ran in haste to inform Ravana, saying : — 
" * O Valiant Sovereign, this thine inviolable grove has been 
destroyed by a wretched monkey who sets thy prowess at 
nought. Slay that perverse creature instantly, who thus 
affronts thee, lest he escape ! * 
" On this, the King of the Titans, Ravana, sent out in numerable warriors called Kinkaras and eighty thousand of 
those titans, armed with spears and maces, were slain by me 
in the grove with an iron bar. Then a few, who survived, 
quickly went to Ravana to inform him of the destruction of 
his troops. 
481 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
"Thereupon I resolved to destroy the marvellous palace 
with its monument and slew the guards stationed there. In 
my fury I laid this building, the ornament of Lanka, low, 
whereupon Ravana sent out the son of Prahasta, Jambumalin 
with a company of titans of grim and fearful aspect. 
" With my formidable mace I slew that mighty and skilful 
warrior with his retinue and Ravana, the Lord of the Titans, 
on hearing this, dispatched the highly powerful sons of the 
ministers followed by a regiment of infantry but with my iron 
bar I sent them all to the abode of death. 
" Learning that, despite their ardour, I had struck down 
the sons of his ministers on the field, Ravana quickly ordered 
five of his heroic commanders to set out at the head of their 
troops, but I slew them all, whereupon Dashagriva sent out 
his highly powerful son, Aksha, with countless titans, to engage 
me in combat. Then that youthful son of Mandodari, a 
skilful warrior sprang into the air and I seized him by the 
feet, whirling him round and throwing him on the earth. 
" Thereat the ten-necked Ravana, full of ire, hearing of the 
downfall of Aksha, sent his second son Indrajit, full of courage 
and martial ardour, against me and I, rendering the prowess 
of all those titans ineffectual, experienced extreme delight. 
Nevertheless, that long-armed warrior in whom Ravana 
had supreme confidence, inflamed with wine, continued to 
fight at the head of his warriors. 
" And he, realising that I was invincible and seeing his 
forces routed, made me captive by aid of the Brahma-weapon, 
whereupon the titans bound me with ropes and taking hold of 
me brought me before Ravana. Then that One of vicious soul 
entered into conversation with me and enquired of me regarding 
my coming to Lanka and why I had slain the titans, whereto 
I replied : — 
" ' I have done all this for Sita ! To find her I came hither ! 
I am the son of Maruta, the monkey Hanuman ! Know me 
to be Rama's messenger and the minister of Sugriva. It is to 
carry out Rama's design that I stand before thee ! Hear me 
now O Lord of the Titans ! The King of the Monkeys offers 
thee salutations and enquires as to thy welfare, O Mighty 
Hero ! He has commissioned me to communicate this message 
482 
SUNDARA KANDA 
in words that are both fitting and in accord with duty, legitimate 
pleasure and profit. 
" ' While sojourning on Rishyamuka, that mountain covered 
with trees, I entered into an alliance with Raghava, that great 
warrior, invincible in combat, and he spoke to me saying : — 
' O King, my consort has been borne away by a titan ; it 
behoves thee to assist me in this matter ! ' Thereafter, in the 
presence of fire, the Lord, Raghava, who was accompanied 
by Lakshmana, allied himself to me in friendship, who had 
been deprived of my royal prerogatives by Bali. 
" * And he hath made me lord over all the monkeys, after 
slaying Bali in combat with a single arrow. It is therefore 
fitting that we should assist him by every means and by virtue 
of this contract I have despatched Hanuman unto thee as envoy. 
Do thou therefore speedily return Sita to Rama, ere those 
valiant monkeys overthrow thy forces. Who is not conversant 
with the monkeys' prowess, whose aid has been solicited 
even by the Gods themselves ? ' 
" Speaking thus to Ravana, he bent his furious glances on 
me as if he would consume me and that ruthless titan ordered 
me to be put to death, being unaware of my power. 
" Meanwhile his high-souled brother Bibishana, endowed 
with great sagacity, interceded for me in the following wise; 
saying : * O Thou Foremost of the Titans, abandon thy resolve, 
which is not in accord with the royal code. The death of an 
envoy is not sanctioned by royal tradition, O Titan. A 
messenger simply communicates the mandate of his master ! 
O Thou of incomparable prowess, there is no warranty for 
his destructon, yet, if his guilt be considerable, he may be 
mutilated.' 
" At these words of Bibishana, Ravana issued this command 
to the demons : ' Set fire to the monkey's tail ! ' 
" On this behest, those titans wrapped my tail in hemp and 
cotton rags and they, in well-wrought armour struck me with 
their clenched fists and sticks and set fire to my tail. Bound 
and fettered with ropes by the titans, I submitted to it, resolving 
to set fire to the city. Thus pinioned and enveloped in flames, 
those warriors, shouting, led me along the royal highway to the 
gates of the city. There, contracting my body I assumed a 
483 21 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
diminutive form and casting off my bonds, I seized an iron 
bar and assailed those titans, thereafter with one bound vault ing the gate, I rapidly burnt down the whole city and its gates 
and towers with my flaming tail, resembling the fire that con sumes all beings at the end of the world. 
" Seeing Lanka in flames I reflected with anxiety that Janaki 
must without doubt have perished since there was no corner 
of the city that had not been reduced to ashes. Thinking thus, 
overcome with grief, 1 overheard the Charanas saying in 
auspicious accents : — 
" ' Janaki has not perished in the flames ! ' and hearing these 
wonderful words, proclaimed by their enchanting voices, I 
regained my courage. I was thereafter reassured by many 
auspicious signs, that Janaki had been saved from the flames 
and though my tail was on fire, I had not been consumed ! 
My heart was filled with joy and the wind spread its delicious 
perfumes. By virtue of these propitious manifestations, by 
my confidence in Rama's prowess and in Sita and the words 
pronounced by the great sages, felicity filled my soul. Then, 
re-visiting Vaidehi once again, I took leave of her and, scaling 
the Mount Arishta, leapt in this direction in order to see you 
all once more. Following the path of the wind, sun, moon 
and the Siddhas and Gandharvas, I found you here. 
" By the grace of Rama and your prowess, I have carried 
out Sugriva's charge to the uttermost. I have related all to 
you in detail and it now remains for you to accomplish what 
is still to be done." 
chapter 59 
Hanuman appeals to the Monkeys to rescue Sita 
Having completed his narrative, Hanuman, born of Maruta, 
added these significant words: — "Fruitful have been the 
endeavours of Rama and Sugriva ! Having witnessed Sita's 
constancy, I am happy at heart ! By the power of her penances, 
the most illustrious Sita is able to uphold the earth or consume 
it with her ire, 0 Monkeys. The power of Ravana also, 
484 
SUNDARA KANDA 
created by austerities, is great and it is because of this that 
he was not destroyed when he laid hands on Sita. Nay, the 
flame to which one reaches out is not so greatly to be feared as 
is Sita's wrath. 
" It now behoveth all the mighty monkeys and others, 
with Jambavan at their head to take part in this expedition, the 
purpose of which is now known to you, in order to behold 
Vaidehi re-united with those two princes. 
" Alone I was able to enter Lanka, inhabited by titans and 
have afflicted that city by my prowess, as also Ravana and his 
people. What more could I not do therefore with the coura geous and powerful Plavagas, endowed with heroism and 
martial prowess, strong and eager for victory ? 
" I shall destroy Ravana with his entire army, his sons, 
brothers and followers in combat. I shall destroy all the 
titans and circumvent those invisible weapons and other missiles, 
bestowed on Indrajita by Brahma, Rudra, Vayu, Varuna, 
scattering them and slaying the titans ; with your sanction my 
prowess will bring them under restraint. Hills and moun tains torn up by me will I discharge continuously, which 
even the Gods themselves cannot withstand, how much less 
those rangers of the night ? Were the sea to overflow or 
Mount Mandara move from its place, Jambavan will never be 
daunted by an enemy host in conflict. And that heroic monkey, 
the son of Bali, is alone able to destroy the entire host of 
Rakshasas. With the movement of his vigorous thighs, the 
powerful Nila could overthrow Mount Mandara itself, how 
much more the titans on the field of battle. Amongst the 
Celestials, the Titans, Yakshas, Gandharvas, serpents or birds, 
show me any who could withstand Dvivida ? Nor do I know 
any who could resist those two sons of the Ashwins, endowed 
with supreme energy, the foremost of monkeys, in the arena. 
" Single-handed I have laid Lanka low and, setting it on 
fire have reduced it to ashes. On every highway I proclaimed 
aloud : * May Victory crown the invincible Rama and Laksh mana ! May the King Sugriva, whose support is Raghava, 
prosper. I am the servant of the King of Koshala, the off spring of Pavana ! I am Hanuman ! ' I have announced this 
everywhere. 
485 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
" In the centre of the Ashoka grove of the vicious-souled 
Ravana, the virtuous Sita waits forlornly at the foot of the 
Shimshapa tree surrounded by titan women, emaciated with 
sorrow and suffering, resembling the orb of the moon bereft 
of its splendour in the midst of cloud. Spurning Ravana, 
whose powers have rendered him arrogant, Vaidehi, the 
daughter of Janaka of fair limbs, remains undeviatingly faithful 
to her lord. Wholly devoted to Rama, the lovely Vaidehi, 
thinks of him alone, as Poulomi, Purandara. Clad in a single 
garment, soiled with dust, I beheld her in the grove surrounded 
by titan women who were heaping insults upon her. Her hair, 
dressed in a single braid that unfortunate being was absorbed 
in the thought of her lord. Lying on the earth, pale as a lotus 
at the approach of winter, separated by Ravana from the 
object of her love, she had resolved to yield up her life. 
" With difficulty I was able to re-kindle Sita's hopes by 
addressing that damsel, whose eyes resemble a doe's, and 
relating all to her. And she, hearing of the alliance between 
Rama and Sugriva became happy and, fixed in her devotion, 
her conjugal affection reached its zenith. Fortunate is that 
ten-necked demon that she has not destroyed him, due to 
the boon he received from Brahma ; but it is for Rama that 
the destruction of that monster is reserved. 
" Already greatly reduced, Janaki grows frailer every day, 
in Rama's absence, as learning wanes that is prosecuted on 
the first day of the lunar fortnight. 
" Thus liveth Sita worn out by grief ! It is for you to take 
counsel as to what it is proper to do in the matter." 
CHAPTER 60 
Janibavan rejects Angada's Project 
Hearing these words, the son of Bali, Angada, said : — 
" The sons of the Ashwins are exceedingly powerful and 
proud of the boon conferred on them by the Grandsire of the 
World, who in order to honour the Ashwi rendered those two 
monkeys incapable of being slain by any. This unique 
privilege inflamed their pride and those two powerful warriors, 
486 
SUNDARA KANDA 
having overcome the mighty celestial host, drank up the 
nectar of immortality. These two, inflamed with ire, are able 
to destroy the entire city of Lanka with its horses, chariots and 
elephants, what of other monkeys ? I myself am capable of 
destroying the city with its titans and the mighty Ravana ! 
How much more so if I am accompanied by powerful warriors, 
masters of themselves, well-armed, skilful and desirous of victory? 
" We have heard that the courageous son of Vayu alone set 
fire to Lanka. He has seen the divine Sita but has not brought 
her back. I deem it unfitting that warriors as renowned as 
you are acquaint Rama of this. There are none in leaping 
and in prowess, whose skill and bravery equal yours in the 
worlds of the Immortals or amongst the Daityas, O Foremost 
of Monkeys. Few have escaped the carnage wrought by 
Hanuman, therefore it only remains for us to slay Ravana 
and the rest of the titans and bring back the daughter of Janaka, 
placing her between Rama and Lakshmana ! What need have 
we to trouble those other residents of Kishkindha ? It is for 
us to proceed to Lanka and, having slain the titans, return to 
Rama, Lakshmana and Sugriva." 
Such was the project of Angada, whereupon Jambavan, the 
foremost of monkeys, in his wisdom, cheerfully made answer 
in words fraught with good sense, saying : — 
" O Great Monkey, O Thou of supreme understanding, we 
have received a mandate from the King of the Monkeys and the 
virtuous Rama to explore the southern region to its utmost 
confines, but we have not been commanded to bring back 
Sita nor would it find favour with that lion among monarchs, 
Rama, if we did so, for he, proud of his lineage, has vowed 
before all the leading monkeys that he will himself deliver her. 
How should his words be rendered null and void ? What is 
the use of undertaking that which is not conducive to his 
pleasure? This display of our prowess will prove fruitless, 
O Foremost of Monkeys ! Let us therefore return to where 
Rama, with Lakshmana and the illustrious Sugriva can be 
found and inform them of the result of our quest. 
What thou hast proposed finds favour with us, O Prince, 
yet it is by adhering to Rama's design that thou shouldst look 
for success." 
487 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 6 I 
The Devastation of Madhuvana 
All the heroic monkeys headed by Angada and the great ape 
Hanuman highly approved Jambavan's words and, those 
foremost of monkeys led by the son of Vayu leaping down 
from the summit of the Mahendra Mountain, bounded forward. 
Resembling the mountains Meru and Mandara, they appeared 
like elephants maddened with ichor, covering the whole of 
space as it were with their shadow, their eyes fixed on the 
highly powerful Hanuman gifted with velocity, having control 
of his senses and honoured by the Siddhas. Resolved on 
bringing about the success of Rama's design, proud of the 
results obtained, desirous of communicating their auspicious 
tidings, all those virtuous inhabitants of the forest, eager to 
assist Rama and avid for combat, jumping and frisking, reached 
Madhuvana. 
And they came to that celestial grove protected by Sugriva, 
planted with coundess trees, enchanting to look upon, where 
none might enter. And Sugriva's maternal uncle, the mighty 
monkey Dadhimukha guarded that picturesque and spacious 
garden belonging to the Lord of Monkeys. Extremely anxious 
to partake of the fruits of that beautiful orchard, those tawny coloured monkeys, greatly delighted, craved permission of the 
prince to taste the honey, yellow as they. Then he graciously 
allowed those venerable monkeys, headed by Jambavan, to 
drink of the honey. 
Thereupon, under Angada's command, authorised by that 
youthful son of Bali, those monkeys ascended the trees, swarm ing with bees, feasting on the fruit and roots and, in an access 
of intoxication, began to frolic here and there. 
Singing, laughing, dancing, bowing, declaiming, running, 
capering and clapping their hands, some supported others, 
some quarrelled and some talked at random. Some leapt 
from tree to tree, springing down from the highest branches, 
488 
SUNDARA KANDA 
some bounded into the air or chased each other round the trees 
from rock to rock, responding to each other's songs and laughter, 
groans and lamentations, exchanging blow for blow. 
Then a general confusion arose amongst that host of monkeys 
and there were none who were not inebriated or inflamed 
with excitement. 
Seeing the wood laid waste, the trees stripped of their leaves 
and flowers, Dadhimukha was filled with anger and sought to 
restrain them. But that heroic and elderly monkey, the 
protector of the wood, was in turn upbraided by those insolent 
monkeys whereupon he grew even more determined to defend 
the forest that was entrusted to his care against them. There after he spoke to some in harsh terms without fear or fore thought and struck others with the palm of his hands, approach ing some threateningly and others with soothing words. 
They, however, excited with liquor, restrained by Dadhi mukha, began to ill-treat him brazenly without reflecting that 
the fault lay with them, scratching him with their nails, 
biting him with their teeth, assailing him with blows of their 
hands and feet, and knocking him senseless laid waste to the 
whole of Madhuvana. 
CHAPTER 62 
The Fight between Dadhimukha and the Intruders 
Then Hanuman said to those monkeys : " O Monkeys, gather 
honey undisturbed ! I will drive away anyone who hinders 
you ! " 
Hearing these words, Angada, that prince of monkeys, gaily 
echoed his advice, saying : " Do you all drink honey. We 
should be guided by all that Hanuman does, who has accom plished his purpose ; even if it be improper, I am in accord 
with it ! " 
Listening to Angada, those foremost of monkeys all cried 
out : — " Excellent ! Excellent ! ", praising the prince again and 
again. Thereafter they surged into the Malin wood with the 
489 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
violence of a torrent and, having penetrated into those orchards, 
they drove away the guards by force. Happy in the thought 
that Hanuman had discovered Maithili and having had tidings 
of her, with the consent of Angada they drank the honey and 
feasted on the fruits. 
Hurling themselves on the guardians of that orchard who 
approached them in hundreds, they overwhelmed them with 
blows and beat them off. Collecting honeycombs, a drona in 
size with their hands, those monkeys, yellow as honey them selves, drank the nectar and threw away the combs ; some in 
frolic pelted each other with wax or piling up the branches 
sat down under the trees ; some, heavy with drink, heaped 
leaves on the earth and lay down exhausted whilst others, 
stimulated by the intoxicating nectar, reeling, struck out at their 
companions wildly. Singing at the top of their voices, some 
imitated the roar of lions and some whistled like birds, others, 
drunk with honey, slept on the ground ; some roared with 
laughter or burst into tears, some babbled wildly whilst others 
tried to interpret their utterances. 
Meanwhile the guards of the forest, the servants of Dadhi mukha, set upon by those terrible monkeys, crushed 
between their knees, fled in all directions. Wrought up with 
fear, they approached Dadhimukha and said : — " Empowered 
by Hanuman, those terrible monkeys have, despite us, laid 
waste to Madhuvana and, crushed between their knees, we 
all but gave up our lives." 
Highly incensed, Dadhimukha, beholding the destruction in 
the Madhu Wood, which had been entrusted to his guards, 
consoled his subordinates, saying : — " Proceed to that place 
and fall upon those insolent monkeys; I myself shall soon follow 
and drive away by force those who are drinking the honey." 
Hearing the words of their master, those valiant monkeys 
returned to Madhuvana and Dadhimukha, in their midst, 
accompanied them with great speed, bearing huge trees. 
Arming themselves with rocks, trees and stones, all those 
monkeys, highly incensed, proceeded to where the Plavam gamas were to be found, where, biting their lips in anger, 
they remonstrated with them again and again, seeking to 
suppress them by force. 
490 
SUNDARA KANDA 
Then all those monkeys, headed by Hanuman, beholding 
Dadhimukha greatly enraged, drove him back with violence 
and, as the mighty Dadhimukha of huge arms advanced bearing 
a tree in his hands, the powerful Angada incensed, intercepted 
him with his hands and, beside himself with inebriation, 
without showing the least mercy, though he merited it being 
his great-uncle, threw him to the ground with violence. Then 
that monkey, his arms and thighs broken and his face mutilated, 
bathed in blood, fell senseless for a space, thereafter, dis engaging himself with difficulty, that foremost of monkeys 
withdrew to a distance and addressed his attendants, saying : — 
" Let us all proceed with haste to where the thick-necked 
Sugriva, resides with Rama. I shall relate all Prince 
Angada's misdeeds to him and filled with ire that Sovereign 
will punish all the monkeys. The enchanting Madhu Wood, 
enjoyed by his forefathers, inviolate even to the Gods, is 
greatly beloved by Sugriva and he will mete out heavy punish ment to those perverse wretches avid for honey and will slay 
those who have disobeyed their sovereign, with their friends 
and kinsfolk. Then shall my wrath, which I am unable to 
restrain, be appeased." 
Speaking thus to the guards of the forest, Dadhimukha, 
their leader, departed with them with all speed and in the 
twinkling of an eye, reached the place where that sagacious 
offspring of the Sun, Sugriva, was. 
Beholding Rama, Lakshmana and Sugriva, that great and 
heroic monkey, Dadhimukha, descending from the sky, alighted 
on the ground and with a sorrowful mien placing his joined 
palms to his forehead, touched Sugriva's feet. 
CHAPTER 63 
Dadhimukha relates how Madhuvana has been hid waste 
Seeing that monkey prostrating himself, his forehead touching 
the earth, Sugriva, his heart moved, said to him : — 
" Rise, Rise ! Why art thou lying prostrate at my feet ? 
Speak without fear ! Why hast thou come hither ? It behoveth 
491 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALM1KI 
thee to make thy purpose plain. Is all well in Madhuvana ? 
I wish to know everything, O Monkey ! " 
Thus reassured by the magnanimous Sugriva, the highly 
sagacious Dadhimukha rose and spoke as follows : — 
" O Lord, that wood which neither thou nor Bali suffered 
to be enjoyed by the monkeys, has been laid waste by them 1 
Seeking to drive them away with my attendants, they, dis regarding me, continued to feast there merrily. I resisted their 
depredations with the assistance of my guards, but without 
showing any consideration for me, O Prince, those savages 
continued their orgy. These attendants of mine, assaulted 
by them, were driven from the wood and those countless 
powerful monkeys, their eyes inflamed with anger, broke their 
arms and feet and, crushing them between their thighs, flung 
them into the air. Thou art the living lord of these warriors 
who have been assaulted by those monkeys, who even now 
are pillaging Madhuvana and quaffing the honey." 
While Sugriva listened to these tidings, the sagacious Laksh mana, Slayer of his Foes, enquired of him saying : — " O King, 
who is this monkey, the guard over the forest who has come 
to thee and what distress has led him to speak thus ? " 
Being thus addressed by the high-souled Lakshmana, 
Sugriva, skilled in converse, answered : — 
" O Noble Lakshmana, this is Dadhimukha and this heroic 
monkey informs me that those war-like forest dwellers led by 
Angada have drunk the honey and eaten the fruits of the 
orchard. Such an escapade would not have been indulged in 
by those who had failed in their mission. Assuredly they have 
been successful since they have devastated the wood. It is for 
this reason that they have beaten with their knees those who 
have obstructed their revelry and have disregarded the valiant 
Dadhimukha whom I myself appointed as guardian to my 
orchard. In sooth, Hanuman and none other must have 
discovered the divine Sita. Hanuman alone could accom plish such a feat. The success of that enterprise depended on 
the sagacity of that foremost of monkeys endowed with 
courage, strength and learning. Where Jambavan and 
Angada are the leaders and Hanuman the moving spirit, 
success is assured. Assuredly Madhuvana has been laid 
492 
SUNDARA KANDA 
waste by those heroic monkeys led by Angada. Having 
explored the southern region, on their return this orch ard excited their cupidity, whereupon they plundered it 
and drank the honey, assaulting the guards and beating them 
with their knees. This monkey, the gentle-voiced Dadhi mukha, renowned for his prowess has come to communicate 
these tidings to me. O Mighty Saumitri, undoubtedly Sita 
must have been found else these monkeys would never have 
destroyed the wood bestowed on us by the Gods." 
Hearing these words pleasant to the ear falling from 
Sugriva's lips, the virtuous Lakshmana and Raghava were 
overcome with joy and the illustrious Sugriva, exultant on 
receiving these tidings from Dadhimukha, answered that 
guardian of the forest, saying : — 
" Highly gratified am I that those warriors, being successful, 
have eaten the honey and fruit ! One should bear with the 
arrogance of those who have been victorious. Return to the 
Madhu Wood immediately and send all those monkeys with 
Hanuman at their head, here ! With these two descendants 
of Raghu, I wish to interrogate those deer of the branches 
without delay, who, with the boldness of lions have fulfilled 
their task, in order to learn if they have discovered Sita." 
Beholding those two princes, their eyes dilated with joy, 
in the height of felicity, the King of the Monkeys, realising the 
success of his enterprise was near, experienced extreme 
satisfaction. 
CHAPTER 64 
Sugrwa consoles Rama 
Thus addressed by Sugriva, the monkey Dadhimukha cheer fully offered obeisance to him and gave salutations to Raghava 
and Lakshmana. Thereafter, having honoured Sugriva and 
those powerful sons of the House of Raghu, escorted by his 
attendants, he sprang into the air. Departing with the 
same speed by which he had come, he descended from the 
493 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
sky and, alighting on the earth, entered the Madhu wood. 
There he beheld those foremost of monkeys, now sober, 
spending the hours happily, having relieved themselves, the 
outcome of drinking honey, and approaching them, that 
hero with joined palms addressed Angada in the following 
words : — 
" O Noble Prince, do not harbour any ill-feeling towards the 
guards, who, enraged, sought to drive thee away by force. 
May peace attend thee ! O Thou of great strength, do thou 
partake of the honey freely which is thine by right, since thou 
art the heir-apparent and owner of the wood. It behoveth 
thee to pardon us for our wrath, arising out of ignorance ! 
Like unto thy sire formerly and Sugriva, so art thou Lord of 
the monkey host ! O Irreproachable Prince, I have related all 
unto thine uncle, who, hearing of the presence of the monkeys 
here, of thine arrival and also of the devastation of the forest, 
was not the least incensed, rather was he gratified. Highly 
pleased, thy paternal uncle, Sugriva, King of the Monkeys, 
said : ' Send them all here without delay ! ' " 
Hearing those words of Dadhimukha, Angada, Prince of the 
Monkeys, skilled in speech, addressed all his companions, 
saying : — 
" O You Leaders of the Monkey Host, undoubtedly all these 
events have been related to Rama. This may be inferred by 
Dadhimukha's tidings. It does not behove us to linger here 
further, our mission having been accomplished, O Slayers of 
your Foes ! You have all drunk honey in full measure, O Heroic 
Forest Dwellers, nothing remains for us but to rejoin Sugriva. 
Whatever all of you counsel me to do, I shall put into effect. 
I am your servant and, though the heir-apparent, it is not for 
me to issue orders to you. You have all accomplished your 
task; it would therefore be unfitting for me to treat you 
arbitrarily." 
Hearing these admirable words of Angada, those monkeys, 
full of delight, spoke thus : — 
" Who, of thy status, O Foremost of Monkeys, would speak 
thus ? Drunk with power, each says : ' I am the leader ! * 
None but thee would utter words of such felicity. Thine 
humility augurs well for us. We are all ready to return to 
494 
SUNDARA KANDA 
Sugriva the King of the Monkeys without delay, but without 
thy word of command none among us is able to advance a 
single step." 
On this, Angada answered them, saying :— " It is well, 
let us go ! ", whereupon all those warriors sprang into the 
air and the space was entirely filled as if by stones shot from 
a mortar. 
Preceded by Angada, who was followed by Hanuman, those 
Plavamgamas bounded tempestuously into the air with a 
great clamour, like clouds driven before the wind. 
Angada having arrived near to Sugriva, the King of the 
Monkeys addressd the lotus-eyed Rama, who was consumed 
with grief, and said : — 
" Be of good courage ! Rest assured the divine Sita has been 
found ! These monkeys would not have returned otherwise, 
the time fixed by me being already past ; I infer this from 
Angada's joy ! Had the long-armed Angada, the foremost of 
monkeys not been successful, he would not have come back 
to me. If they had not succeeded in their enterprise, after 
such an escapade, that youthful prince, his mind troubled, 
would have appeared dejected. Without having seen the 
daughter of Janaka, they would not have dared to destroy 
Madhuvana which was obtained from my forbears or attacked 
that venerable monkey who guards it. O Noble Son of 
Kaushalya, O Thou fixed in thy vow and faithful to thine 
obligations, in sooth Hanuman and none else has discovered 
Sita. No other is qualified to encompass this end. O Thou, 
the foremost of the virtuous, the means to success are intelli gence, resolution, valour and knowledge and Hanuman is 
endowed with all these. Where Jambavan with Angada leads 
and Hanuman directs the work, there can be but one outcome. 
O Thou of immeasurable prowess, have no anxiety ! Those 
dwellers of the wood, having reached the height of insolence, 
would not have entered into an escapade of this kind had 
they failed in their mission. They have laid waste Madhuvana 
and taken the honey, I infer therefore that they have been 
successful." 
At that instant, cries of " Kilakila " resounded in the sky 
from those inhabitants of the woods, who, proud of Hanuman's 
495 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
exploit, were proceeding towards Kishkindha, thus proclaim ing their trumph. 
Hearing that tremendous clamour, the King of the Monkeys, 
curling and uncurling his tail, became greatly excited, whilst 
those monkeys, eager to see Rama, with Angada at their head 
and Hanuman before them, drunk with joy, alighted from the 
sky in front of their sovereign and Raghava. 
Thereafter the mighty-armed Hanuman, inclining his head 
in salutations, informed Rama of Sita's physical and spiritual 
well-being. And hearing from Hanuman the auspicious 
words sweet as Amrita : " I have seen Sita ", the joy of 
Rama and Lakshmana was extreme and Lakshmana gazed on 
Sugriva, who had placed the matter in the hands of the son of 
Pavana, with profound respect, whilst Raghava, the destroyer 
of his foes, in extreme felicity looked on Hanuman with venera tion. 
chapter 65 
Hanuman tells Rama of his Meeting with Sita 
Having reached the Mount Prasravana with its many woods, 
Hanuman paid obeisance to the mighty Rama and Lakshmana. 
Preceded by the heir-apparent, Angada and bowing to Sugriva 
and the monkeys, he began to recount the story of Sita and 
her confinement in Ravana's harem, of the threats of the 
female titans, of her unflinching devotion to Rama and the 
time fixed for her execution. All this did the monkey relate 
in Rama's presence. * 
And hearing of Vaidehi's well-being, Rama said ; — " O 
Monkeys, where is the illustrious Sita to be found and what 
are her feelings towards me ? Do ye relate everything unto me ! " 
Hearing Rama's words, the monkeys requested Hanuman, 
conversant with the matter, to describe all in detail. And he, 
versed in the art of speech, acquiescing in their desire, in clining his head in salutation to the divine Sita, turning to the 
south described his meeting with her and bestowed on Rama 
496 
SUNDARA KANDA 
the heavenly jewel, blazing in its own effulgence ; then the 
son of Maruta offered obeisance to him and said : — 
" Anxious to behold Sita, I crossed the ocean four hundred 
miles in extent and after a time reached Lanka, that city be longing to the wicked Havana which is situated on the southern 
shore of the sea. There I beheld Sita in the inner apartments 
of Ravana and there she dwells, O Rama, centring all her 
thoughts on thee. I observed her reviled by hideous titan 
women who are guarding her in the grove and that noble 
lady, accustomed by thee to felicity, is now stricken with 
grief in thine absence, O Hero. Imprisoned in Havana's inner 
apartments under the strict surveillance of those female demons, 
wearing a single plait, forlorn, that unfortunate being is 
absorbed in the thought of thee ! Lying on the earth, emaciated, 
resembling a lotus on the approach of winter, spurning Ravana, 
she is resolved to yield up her life. 
"O Kakutstha, O Guileless Prince, with considerable diffi culty I discovered that princess of whom thou art in some sort 
the very soul and, narrating the glories of the Ikshwaku Race, I 
succeeded in gaining her confidence, whereupon I told her all. 
" Hearing of the alliance between thee and King Sugriva, 
she was greatly delighted and she remains constant to thee in 
faith and love. O Foremost of Men, it was in this condition 
that I discovered her engaged in severe penances with her 
heart fixed on thee. Bestowing this jewel upon me, she 
requested me to relate to thee what happened on Chittrakuta 
concerning the crow, O Sagacious One and, addressing me 
thus, she said : — 
" * O Son of Vayu, do thou describe all that thou hast seen 
here to Rama and present him with this jewel, which has 
been preserved by me with care. Do thou remind him of the 
mark traced with red powder on my countenance ! Say : — 
' O Sinless One, seeing this unique pearl formed by the 
waters that I send to thee, meseems I see thee before me and 
I rejoice in the midst of my distress. O Son of Dasaratha, 
I shall live but for a month, after which, being in the power 
of the titans, I shall die ! '" 
" Such were the words addressed to me by Sita of emaciated 
limbs, whose eyes resemble a doe's, imprisoned in Ravana's 
497 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
apartments. I have related all faithfully to thee, O Raghava, 
now take counsel in order to bridge the ocean." 
Seeing those two princes filled with renewed hope, the son 
of Vayu having presented the jewel as a token of recognition to 
Raghava, described everything to him from beginning to end. 
CHAPTER 66 
Rama's Grief 
At these words of Hanuman, Rama, born of Dasaratha, press ing the jewel to his heart, wept with Lakshmana. And be holding that marvellous gem, Raghava, stricken with grief, 
his eyes suffused with tears, said to Sugriva : — 
" As milk flows from the udders of a cow on beholding its 
calf, so does my heart brim over on beholding this jewel ! 
This pearl was conferred on Sita by my father-in-law on the 
occasion of our nuptuals and she wore it on her brow, thus 
enhancing her beauty. Obtained from the waters and rever enced by the Gods, it was conferred on Janaka by the sagacious 
Shakra, gratified by his adoration at a sacrifice. 
" Seeing this magnificent gem, I recall the presence of my 
sire and my father-in-law, the King of Videha. This lovely 
ornament appeared beautiful on the forehead of my beloved 
and seeing it, it seems as if she herself were present here' 
As if sprinkling water on one who has lost consciousness, 
do thou relate to me what Vaidehi hath said, again and again, 
O Friend! What could be more poignant, O Saumitri, than 
seeing this pearl obtained from the waters, without Vaidehi ? 
If she survive one month more, she will five long, but it is 
hard for me to exist an instant without Sita ! Do thou lead 
me to where thou hast seen my beloved ; after hearing these 
tidings, I cannot brook a moment's delay. How can that lady 
of lovely hips, who was ever timorous, endure life amidst 
those grim and fearful demons? As the autumnal moon, 
enveloped in cloud is unable to shine forth, so Sita's counten ance is no longer resplendent. O Hanuman, do thou relate 
49* 
SUNDARA KANDA 
unto me again and again what Sita said to thee. These words 
will revive me as the sick are cured by medicine. O Hanuman, 
what did my gentle, sweet-spoken and beautiful lady, who is 
separated from me, say to thee? How is that daughter of 
Janaka able to survive in her dire misfortune ? " 
chapter 67 
Hanuman describes his Interview with Sita 
Being thus addressed by the bigh-souled Raghava, Hanuman 
began to relate all that Sita had said to him : — 
" O Lion among Men, in order to give credence to my 
report, the divine Sita described what took place on Mount 
Chittrakuta. Sleeping happily at thy side, Janaki one day 
was the first to wake, when suddenly a crow wounded her 
breast with its beak. O Rama, thou wert then asleep on 
Sita's lap and that crow again attacked her, pecking her cruelly, 
and, being bathed in blood and suffering, she did arouse thee. 
O Slayer of thy foes, seeing her breast wounded, thou, like an 
angry serpent didst enquire, saying : — ' Who, O Timid One, 
hath with his claws wounded thee ? Who hath dared to play 
with a five-headed snake ? ' Then, looking here and there, 
thou didst perceive the crow with its talons sharp and bloody 
standing before thee. And that foremost of birds was Indra's 
son, who with the speed of the wind disappeared into the 
earth. Then thou, O Mighty-armed One, didst roll thine 
eyes furiously and resolve to destroy that crow. Taking a 
tuft of Kusha grass from where thou hadst lain, pronouncing 
the Brahma-mantra, thou didst hurl the blade that blazed up 
like the fire at the dissolution of the world at the bird and 
that naming grass followed in its wake. 
" Forsaken by the Gods, who were terrified, that crow 
traversed the Three Worlds without finding a protector and 
returned to thee, O Subduer of thy foes, seeking refuge in thee 
and falling on the earth before thee. Thereupon, O Kakutstha, 
499 8K 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
thou in thy compassion didst pardon it, albeit it merited death. 
But thinking it improper that the purpose of the weapon should 
be rendered void, thou didst destroy the right eye of that crow, 
0 Raghava. Then paying homage to thee and to King 
Dasaratha, that bird, thus delivered, returned to its abode. 
" Sita said : — ' O Raghava, thou art the foremost of those 
skilled in weapons, mighty and full of integrity, why dost 
thou not discharge thy shafts against the titans ? Neither the 
Gods, Gandharvas, Asuras or Maruta can withstand thee in 
battle. If thou in thy magnanimity hast any regard for me, 
then with thy well-directed shafts destroy Ravana without 
delay. Under the behest of his brother, why does not Laksh mana, the scourge of his foes and the foremost of men, fly 
to my defence ? 
" ' How is it that those two mighty lions among men, the 
equals of Vayu and Agni in valour, whom the Gods them selves are unable to overcome, have forgotten me ? Assuredly 
1 have committed a great sin, since those two scourges of 
their foes, who are able to do so, do not unite to deliver me ! ' 
" To those plaintive and gentle words of the noble Vaidehi, 
I answered : ' O Illustrious Lady, Rama is sorely stricken on 
account of thine absence and seeing his brother a prey to 
sorrow, Lakshmana too is suffering, I swear it. Since I have 
found thee at last, the time for lamentation is past. In an 
instant thou shalt see the end of thy woes, O Lovely Princess. 
Those two sons of a king, the foremost of men and subduers 
of their foes, eager to see thee once more, will reduce Lanka 
to ashes. Having slain the cruel Ravana with his kinsfolk in 
battle, Raghava will take thee back to his capital, O Charming 
One ! O Irreproachable Lady, do thou bestow some token 
on me that is known to Rama and will bring him delight.' 
"Thereat Sita, glancing round on every side, drew from 
her robe an excellent jewel which had fastened her locks and 
bestowed it on me, O Mighty One. 
" Then I, inclining my head in salutation, took the gem into 
my hands and made ready to depart, O Beloved of the Raghu 
Race ! Whereupon, seeing me about to take my leave expand- 
ing my body, Sita, the beautiful and unfortunate daughter of 
Janata, her face bathed in tears, addressed me in a voice 
500 
SUNDARA KANDA 
strangled with sobs and, in the intensity of distress at my 
departure, said to me : — 
" ' Happy art thou, O Monkey, since thou shalt behold the 
mighty Rama whose eyes resemble lotuses and the long-armed 
Lakshmana, my illustrious brother-in-law ! * 
" To these words of Maithili, I made answer : — * Climb 
on my back without delay, O Noble Lady, and this very day 
I will show thee Sugriva, Lakshmana and thy consort Rama, 
O Fortunate Dark-eyed Princess ! ' 
M Then that Goddess answered me, saying : — * It is not 
proper for me to climb on thy back of mine own accord, O 
Great Monkey ! Although before this I was touched by the 
demon, it was on account of my helplessness, subject as I 
was to destiny. Do thou thyself repair to where those two 
princes are ! ' After this she added : — 
" * O Hanuman, do thou greet those two lions among men 
with Sugriva and his ministers ! Do thou describe unto Rama 
and Lakshmana of immeasurable prowess the intensity of my 
despair and the insults heaped on me by the titans. May thy 
journey be prosperous, O Foremost of Monkeys ! ' 
" Thus did that illustrious princess speak to me in the 
midst of her grief. Reflecting on my narrative, have faith in 
the integrity of the virtuous Sita." 
CHAPTER 68 
He repeats his Words of Consolation to Sita 
" O Foremost of Men, that Goddess then addressed me in 
the mjdst of her grief out of love for thee and solicitude on 
my account, saying :— 
" * Do thou repeat all this to the son of Dasaratha, so that 
he may come with all speed and, having slain Ravana in combat, 
take me hence. O Hero, O Subduer of thy foes, if it find 
approval with thee, rest concealed here in some secret spot 
for one more day to relieve thy fatigue and to-morrow thou 
canst make ready to depart ! O Hanuman, in thy com- 
5« 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
pany I am able to forget my sufferings awhile. 0 Thou 
gifted with great prowess, I shall await thy return but 
doubt if I shall be living then. Beholding thee no more, I 
shall be consumed with fear, unfortunate creature that I am, 
overwhelmed with affliction ! Moreover I am filled with doubt 
regarding thy companions, the bears and monkeys and how 
in effect, they and those two princes will be able to cross the 
impassable ocean. O Irreproachable Warrior, there are only 
three creatures qualified to traverse the sea — Garuda, Vayu 
and thyself. In view of this insurmountable obstacle, what 
possibility of success dost thou see, O Thou foremost of those 
skilled in the art of converse ? True it is, that thou art able to 
accomplish this work single-handed, O Subduer of thy foes, 
but such a manifestation of prowess would benefit thee alone. 
If Rama however, with his forces, slaying Ravana in fight, 
were to bring me back in triumph to his capital, it would 
redound to his glory. It would not be worthy of Raghava to 
capture me by stealth as did Ravana, who under a disguise 
bore me away from the forest. Truly it would prove a feat 
of signal excellence, worthy of him, if Kakutstha, the con queror of his foes, should destroy Lanka and deliver me. 
Do thou so act that that high-souled hero may display his 
prowess ! ' 
" Hearing these words, full of good sense, reasonable and 
affectionate, I replied for the last time : — 
" ' O Goddess, Sugriva, the Leader of the bears and monkeys, 
gifted with valour, has resolved to deliver thee. He hath 
under his command innumerable powerful and courageous 
monkeys gifted with prowess, who are as swift as thought, 
able to go upwards or downwards and to every side, whom 
nothing can impede nor may they be daunted by the hardest 
tasks. Moreover those great and powerful monkeys, endowed 
with vigour, have circled the earth again and again, coursing 
through the air. Sugriva has many monkeys equal to me 
and greater ; none are inferior. If I am able to cross the sea, 
how much more these heroes ? The great ones are never sent 
out on a mission but those of inferior merit only. 
" O Lady, now abandon grief; in one bound those leaders 
of the monkey hosts will reach Lanka and these two lions 
502 
SUNDARA KANjDA 
among men, like unto the sun and moon, will present them selves to thee, O Princess. Soon shalt thou see at Lanka's 
gate, Raghava, resembling a lion and Lakshmana, bow in 
hand. And thou shalt soon behold those monkey warriors, 
endowed with the strength of lions and tigers, whose weapons 
are their nails and teeth, resembling the lords of the elephants, 
hastening here without delay. Ere long thou shalt hear the 
roaring of those leaders of monkeys on the summit of the 
Mount Malaya, resembling the rumbling of clouds. Soon 
thou shalt see Raghava, the Slayer of His foes, returning from 
his exile in the forest, installed on the throne with thee in 
Ayodhya.' 
" Thereafter the daughter of the King of Mitbila, though 
profoundly afflicted by thine absence, was comforted by these 
auspicious words and experienced great peace." 
END OF SUNDARA KANDA 
5o3 
GLOSSARY 
(For Flowers, Trees and Weapons, see separate Glossaries) 
Abhijit. The twenty-second Nakshatra q.v. 
Abiki. A sheep. 
Achamana. A purificatory rite at which water is taken in the 
palm of the hands and poured over the head and breast and 
the mouth rinsed. It also includes touching various parts of 
the body. 
Acharya. A spiritual Preceptor. 
Adambara. A drum. 
Aditi. Mother of the Gods, who represents space and infinity. 
Adityas. Sun Gods or sons of Aditi. 
Agaru. Agallochum, a species of sandal or Indian Aloe Exorcaria. 
Used as incense or for perfuming purposes. 
Agastya. A great Rishi, the reputed author of several hymns in 
the Rig-Veda. This Sage, whose miraculous powers are 
described in the great classics, entertained Rama, Sita and 
Lakshmana in his hermitage during their exile. 
Agneya. A mountain. Also the south-eastern quarter, of which 
Agni is Regent. 
Agni. The God of Fire. 
Agnihotra. The Fire Sacrifice. 
Agrahayana. A Feast similar to the Harvest Festival. 
Ahalya. Wife of the Rishi Gautama, who was transformed into 
a rock by her husband's curse and ultimately restored by 
Rama to her natural state. 
Airavata. The sacred elephant that transports the God, Indra. 
Aja. A king of the dynasty of Ikshwaku, father of Dasaratha. 
Ajas. A class of hermits. See note on Ascetics. 
Akampana. The Titan who informed Ravana of the destruction of 
Janasthana and persuaded him to abduct Sita. 
Alaka. Kuvera's capital. 
Amaravati. Indra's capital, also called Vitapavati. 
Ambarisha. A king whose story is told in Balakanda. 
Amrita. The " Nectar of Immortality " produced by the churn ing of the ocean by Gods and Demons. 
Ananga. Lit. : " Bodiless " — a name given to Kandarpa, the 
God of Love. 
Ahanta. The thousand-headed serpent or Shesha on which the 
Lord Vishnu rests during the withdrawal of the worlds. 
505 
GLOSSARY 
Anasuya. Wife of the Rishi Atri. 
Andhaka. A demon, son of the Sage Kashyapa and Diti— 
Andhaka was said to have a thousand arms and heads and was 
slain by Shiva. 
Anga. The kingdom ruled over by King Lompada, probably Bengal. A part or limb. An army may be divided into 
angas and in this context has been translated as divisions. 
Angada. The son of Bali, a monkey warrior. 
Angakaka. A female demon. 
Anila. The God of the Wind. 
Anjali. A salutation made with joined palms. 
Anjana. A nymph with whom the God of the Wind became 
enamoured and who subsequently gave birth to Hanuman. 
Anshumak. Son of Asamanjas. See Balakanda for his story. 
Antaka. A name of Yama, the God of Death. 
Antigas. A measure implying the utmost number. 
Anuhlada. The son of Hiranya-kashipu, a Daitya and the father 
of Prahlada whose story is told in the Vishnu Purana. Hir anyakasipu was slain by Vishnu in his incarnation of Nrsi ngha, half man, half lion. 
Apsara. "Ap " meaning water and " sara " to emerge from ; 
the name means a water-sprite or nymph. The Apsaras 
were the wives of the Gandharvas. 
Aranya. A forest. 
Arbudha. A number approximating to a hundred million. 
Arghya. A traditional offering of water, milk, kusha grass, rice, 
Durva grass, sandalwood, flowers, etc. 
Arishtanemi. A name of Garuda's meaning " The Felly of 
whose wheel is unhurt ". 
Artha. Dbarma, Artha and Kama — duty, prosperity and legiti mate pleasure, which are said to be the three ends of life. 
Artha- Shastra. The science of moral and political government. 
The Artha Shastras are ancient Hindu treatises summarizing 
the main duties of man in the field of politics and economics, 
where the subjects are treated from the individual and not the 
universal point of view. 
Aruna. Brother of Garuda. 
Arundhati. Wife of the Rishi Vasishtha, a model of conjugal 
excellence. Also the morning star. 
Aryamana. Chief of the Pittris or Ancestors. 
Asava. Wine made of sugar and honey or the blossom of Bossia 
Latifiloia or, according to some, grapes. 
Ascetics. Sages who practised austerities, of which the following 
are specially cited : — 
Ardrapatavasa. Those practicing silent prayer. 
Asmakuttas. Those who lived in stone huts on uncooked 
food. 
506 
GLOSSARY 
Dantolukhalis. Those who took raw food such as grain 
crushing it between their teeth. 
Gatmasayyas. Those who slept on the ground without 
making a bed. 
Marichipas. Those who lived by absorbing the rays of 
the sun or moon. 
Fancagni. Those practising asceticism between five 
fires, i.e. : four fires and the sun above. 
Patraharas. Those who lived on the leaves of trees. 
Sampraksalas. Those said to be born of the water in 
which Brahma's feet were cleansed. 
Vaikhanasas. Born from the nails of the Creator, Brahma. 
Valakhilyas. Born from the body of Brahma. 
Ashadha. The month that covers part of June and July. 
Ashoka. One of King Dasaratha's counsellors. For the tree of 
this name see separate Glossary. 
Ashrama. Hermitage or forest retreat 
Ashwayuj. The month September — October. 
Ashwins or Ashwini-Kumaras. Celestial horsemen, precursors of 
the dawn, twin offspring of the sun and patrons of medicine. 
Asura. A Demon or Titan, enemy of the Gods. 
Aswamedha. Horse sacrifice of Vedic times, performed only by 
kings. 
Athakva Veda. The fourth Veda. 
Atibala. See Bala and Atibala. 
Atodyas. A musical instrument. 
Atri. One of the Seven Immortal Sages. 
Atyartha Sadaka. One of King Dasaratha's counsellors. 
Aum or Om. The sacred syllable, said to have been the first sound 
in creation. Its import can be studied in the Mandukya 
Upanishad. 
Aurva. A great Rishi, the grandson of Bhrigu. His name is 
derived from " uru " or thigh as he was said to have 
been produced from his mother's thigh. His austerities 
alarmed the Gods and his anger against the warrior class, who 
had slain his forbears, was unparalleled. Eventually it was 
mitigated by the intervention of the Pittris and he cast the 
fire of his wrath into the sea, where it became a being with 
a horse's head named Haya-shira. 
Ayodhya. The capital of Koshala, ruled over by King Dasaratha, 
possibly Oudh. 
Ayomukha. A mountain. 
Ayomukhi. A female Titan or Demon. 
Ayurveda. The " Veda of life ". A work on medicine attri buted to the Sage Dhanwantari who rose from the ocean 
when it was churned by Gods and Titans. 
Ayuta. A number not to be counted, a myriad or sometimes said 
to be a thousand plus a hundred. 
507 
GLOSSARY 
B 
BAHADUR. A title of honour, conferred by Mohammedan kings, 
similar to a knighthood. 
Bala and Atibala. The Science of Sacred Formulas, given to 
Rama by the Sage Vishwamitra. 
Bali or Vali. King of the Monkeys, slain by Rama. His brother 
was Sugriva. 
Balhikas or Valhikas. Bactrians or people of the North and 
West of India. 
Bhaga. A Deity mentioned in the Vedas, who was an 
Aditya presiding over love and marriage. The name means 
" Wealthy Master ", " Gracious Lord ", " Bestower of 
Wealth ". 
Bhagiratha. A descendant of King Sagara, who by his penances 
brought the sacred river Gunga down to earth. A name of 
the river Gunga or Ganges, so called after the Sage Bhagiratha. 
Bharadwaja. A Sage who entertained Rama, Sita and Lakshmana 
in the forest and subsequently created a great feast for Bharata. 
See Balakanda. Many Vedic hymns are attributed to him. 
Bharata. The younger brother of Rama and son of Queen Kaikeyi. 
Bharatvarsha. Ancient India. 
Bhasa. A vulture or bird of prey. 
Bhaskara. Father of Sugriva. A name of the Sun. 
Bheris. A kettledrum. 
Bmogavati. The voluptuous subterranean capital of the Serpent 
Race also called Putkari. 
Bhrigu. A Vedic Sage, said to be the son of Manu, the progenitor 
of mankind. 
Bhringaraja. A shrike or a bee. 
Bhur, Bhuvah, Swah. The Lower, Middle and Upper Worlds. 
Bhutas. Ghosts, imps or goblins, malignant spirits. 
Bhuti. The mother of the nymph Manu. 
Bibishana or Vibishana. Brother of Ravana but a devotee of 
Rama, who conferred the Kingdom of Lanka on him after 
Ravana's death. 
Bishaka or Vishaka. A devotee who constantly contemplates the 
Deity. Also one of the Nakshatras q.v. 
Brahma. The creative aspect of Divinity, Shri Vishnu being the 
maintaining aspect and Shiva the destructive aspect. 
Brahmachari. Religious student living in the house of a spiritual 
teacher, having taken certain vows. 
Brahmacharini. The female equivalent of Brahmachari. 
Brahmacharya. Religious studentship, implying the taking of 
certain vows. 
Brahma-Jnana. Knowledge of Brahman, Truth or the highest 
Reality. 
508 
GLOSSARY 
Brahma-Loka. The abode or region of Brahma. 
Brahman. The Absolute or highest Reality. Attributeless Being. 
Brahmaputra. Son of Brahma. 
Bkahmarshi. A constellation said by some to be Shravana q.v. 
Bratasura, Vratasura or Vritra. A Titan slain by Indra. 
Brihaspati or Vrihaspati. The spiritual Preceptor of the Gods, 
also said to be the Regent of the planet Jupiter which is called 
by the same name. 
Budha. The planet Mercury. 
Caitya. Tombstone, column, or pile of stones. 
Cakracara. Lit. : Going in a circle. A class of heavenly beings. 
Castes. The four : Priest, Warrior, Merchant and those who 
serve these three. 
Cexika. Musical instrument. 
Chattaratha or Chitaratha. King of the Gandharvas q.v. 
Chakratunda. A fish resembling a wheel in appearance. 
Chakravaka. Brahmany duck or ruddy goose. 
Chamara. Chowrie, a fan made of Yaks' tails, insignia of royalty. 
Chamara. A Yak, Bos Grunniens, highly prized for its bushy tail. 
Chandala. An outcaste. 
Chandra. The moon. 
Charanas. The Panegyrists of the Gods. 
Chitra. The planet Spica. The month Chitra or Chaitra is 
part of February and March. 
Chxttrakuta. A sacred mountain where Rama and Sita dwelt 
while in exile. It is still a holy retreat. 
Dattyas. Titans. 
Daksiia. Son of Shri Brahma. His daughter Uma became 
Shiva's consort. 
Dakshina. Traditional offering made after a sacred ceremony. 
Danavas. A race of giants, enemies of the Gods. 
Dandaka. A vast forest lying between the rivers Godaveri and 
Narmada, the scene of Rama and Sita's exile. 
Danu. A name of the Demon Kabandha q.v. 
Dashagriva, " The Ten-Necked One." A title of Ravana. 
Dashanana. "Ten-Faced One." A name of Ravana. 
Dasakatha. King of Koshala, father of Rama, Lakshmana, 
Bharata and Shatrughna. 
Datyuhaka. A small gallinule resembling a cuckoo. 
509 
GLOSSARY 
Devarishi. See under Rishi. 
Devas. The Gods or Shining Ones. 
Devi. A title given to Parvati q.v. 
Dhanada. A name of Kuvera, the God of Wealth, " Giver of 
Wealth." 
Dhara. Wife of the Sage Kashyapa. 
Dharma. Traditionally ordained course of conduct or duty. 
The Law of Righteousness. Dharma is personified in one 
of the Prajapatis, God of moral and religious duty. Also 
the four ends of life : Legitimate enjoyment, prosperity and 
duty, the fourth being the attainment of spiritual bliss. 
Dharmabrit. A Sage whom Rama encountered near the Lake of 
the Four Nymphs. 
Dhatar or Dhatri. Creator, Author or Founder, a name given 
to Vishnu or Brahma and others. 
Dhrishti. One of the chief counsellors of King Dasaratha. 
Dhuma. The God of smoke. 
Dhumaketu. A meteor, comet or falling star. The personified 
descending node. 
Dhundumara. Slayer of the Demon Dhundu, a title of the King 
Kuvalayashwa. 
Dilipa. Father of the Sage Bharadwaja. 
Dindima. A musical instrument. 
Diti. Daughter of Daksha, wife of Kashyapa, mother of the 
Daityas. 
Divisions of Time, the Three. Past, present and future. 
Droka. A measure approximating to 92 lbs. 
Dukula. Woven silk or very fine cloth made of the inner bark 
of the plant of the same name. 
Dundhubi. A giant slain by Bali. Also a kettledrum. 
Dushana. A General of Khara's army, slain by Rama. 
Dyumatsena. Prince of S'abra, father of Satyavanta. 
Ekashalya or Ekacalya. An aquatic creature. The word means 
" having a tip or point ". Possibly a shark, or swordfish. 
Gadhi. Father of the Sage Vishwamitra, the son of King Kushanaba, 
hence the patronymic Kaushika. 
Gandhamandana. A general of the monkey army, killed by 
Indrajita, also the name of a mountain, " The Mount of 
Intoxicating Fragrance ". 
510 
GLOSSARY 
Gandharvas. Celestial Musicians. 
Ganges. The sacred river Gunga, also known under many other 
names such as Bhagirathi, Harasekhara, or the " Crest of Shiva," 
Khapaga, ,e Flowing from Heaven," Tripathaga, " Three-way 
Flowing," Mandakini, Gently Flowing, Jahnavi, after the 
Sage Jahnu, etc. 
Garuda. King of the Birds, the vehicle of Shri Vishnu and the 
destroyer of serpents, sometimes portrayed as an eagle or jay. 
Gautama. A great sage, the husband of Ahalya q.v. 
Gayatri. The most sacred prayer of the Rig-Veda. A Goddess, 
wife of Brahma, mother of the Four Vedas. 
Godaveri. A river close to the Dandaka Forest. 
Godha. A piece of leather or metal worn on the left arm to protect 
it from the bow-string. 
Goha. A soft leather, possibly cow or doeskin, 
Golangula. A black monkey that has a tail like a cow's. 
Golobha. A giant. 
Goshpada. A measurement equal to a cow's hoof. 
Grandsire of the World. A title of Brahma. 
Gridhiras. Birds of prey. 
Grihi. A person who, having finished his education, marries and 
becomes a householder. Also known as Grihasta. 
Guha. King of the Nishadas, a mountain tribe. A great devotee 
of Rama. 
Guhyakas. Hidden Beings, attendants on Kuvera q.v. 
Gunas. " Guna " literally means a thread or strand. It is also 
used for a quality, attribute or property : for instance, the air 
has tangibility and sound for its " guna ". According to the 
Sankhya Philosophy, nature consists of the equipoise of the 
three gunas Sattwa, Rajas and Tamas, or goodness, passion 
and darkness, which are the characteristics of all created things. 
Guru. A traditional Teacher of the spiritual science. One who 
dispels ignorance. 
H 
Hala Hala. The poison churned from the ocean by Gods and 
Demons. 
Hamsa. Swan, flamingo or heron. 
Hanuman or Hanumat. A monkey minister of Sugriva, the King 
of the Monkeys. Hanuman was the son of Pavana, the God 
of the Wind and Anjana. He became a devotee of Rama's 
and was an ideal disciple. He is also known as Maruti, 
Anjaneya, Yogachara, for his magic and healing powers, and 
Rajata-dyuti, " The Brilliant ". 
Hari. The name of the Lord Vishnu, meaning " captivating " 
or " pleasing ". 
511 
GLOSSARY 
Hakivahana. A name of Gamda meaning " Bearer of Vishnu '*. 
Hasta. A star, the thirteenth lunar asterism identified as Corvus. 
Hawan. A particular offering to the Gods ; an ancient fire ceremony. 
Hayagrtva. Lit. : " horse-necked ". According to one legend, 
Vishnu himself assumed this form to recover the Veda which 
had been carried off by two Daityas, Madhu and Kaitabha. 
Hema. A nymph ; also a kind of gold. 
Himapandara. One of the Elephants of the Four Quarters, 
supporting the earth. 
Himavat. Lit. : " The Abode of Snows ". The King of 
Himalaya. 
Hiranya-Kasihpu. Lit. : " Golden Dress ". A Daitya who ob tained the sovereignty of the Three Worlds from Shiva, for 
a million years, and persecuted his son Prahlada, a devotee of 
Vishnu. 
Homa. The Homa sacrifice is the act of making an oblation to 
the Gods by pouring butter into the fire, to the accompaniment 
of prayers and invocations. It is regarded as one of the five 
great sacrifices called " Deva-yajnas ". 
Ikshnaku. Son of Manu, founder of the Solar Race of Kings 
who reigned in Ayodhya. 
Ilvala. A demon subdued by the Sage Agastya. 
Indra. The King of the Gods, who is known under many other 
names, such as : Mahendra, or Great Indra, Shatakratu, or 
" He of a hundred sacrifices ", Purandara, " Destroyer of 
Cities", Vajrapani, " Of the Thunderbolt hand ", " Lord of 
Sachi ", Maghavan, "Possessor of Wealth". 
Indraloka. The Abode of Indra or the Celestial Realm. 
Iravati. Mother of the elephant Airavata. 
Jabali. A Brahmin of King Dasaratha's court. 
Jagari. Coarse brown sugar made of palm sap. 
Jahnavi. A name of the sacred River Gunga. 
Jahnu. The Sage who drank up the Gunga. 
Jambavan or Jambavat. King of the Bears, an ally of Rama. 
Jambu. A river. 
Jambudwtpa. One of the seven continents of which the world 
was said to be composed. 
Janaka. King of Mithila, father of Sita. 
Janaki. A name of Sita. 
512 
GLOSSARY 
Janasthana. The colony of Titans in the Dandaka Forest. 
Japa. Silent repetition of a prayer or sacred formula. 
Jatarupa. Gold in its original purity. 
Jatayu. The King of the Vultures, who attempted to prevent 
Havana from carrying Sita away. 
Jaya. A Goddess, producer of weapons. 
Jayanta. Bang Dasaratha's minister. 
Juta. The matted locks of a devotee. 
K 
Kabandha. An Asura or Demon, slain by Rama and Lakshmana. 
Kadamvari. Natural wines which require no preparation. 
Kadru. A daughter of Daksha and wife of the Rishi Kashyapa ; 
she was the mother of the many-headed serpents, including 
Shesha and Vasuki. 
Kaikeya. The Kingdom ruled over by King Kaikeya. 
Kaikeyi. Favourite Queen of King Dasaratha and mother of 
Bharata. 
Kailasha. Sacred mountain, said to be the abode of Shiva. 
Kakutstha. A title used for the descendants of Kakutstha in the 
House of Ikshwaku, also for Puranjaya, a prince of the Solar 
race, whose story is told in the Vishnu Purana, From 
" Kakud ", an emblem of royalty and " Stha " — residing— 
meaning a prince, a grandson of Ikshwaku. 
Kalaguru. Aloes or AgaUochum, a species of sandal. 
Kalahamsa. A kind of duck or goose, Gallinula Porphyria. 
Kalaka. Wife of the Rishi Kashyapa, mother of the Danavas. 
Kalindi. Wife of King Asit. 
Kalmashl A titan, demon or goblin. 
Kama or Kandarpa. The Indian Cupid, or God of Love. 
Kapila. A great Sage who destroyed the sons of King Sagara. 
Karanda or Karandava. A species of duck. 
Karka. The sign of Cancer. 
Karma. The law governing the behaviour of matter in all its 
gross and subtle forms, according to the divine purpose. 
Karttika. The month October — November. When the sun 
enters Libra. 
Karttikeya. The God of War, the son of Shiva, also called Skanda 
and Mahasena "Great Captain," 
Kashi. The sacred City of Benares. 
Kashyapa. The great Vedic Sage, grandson of Brahma and 
father of Vivaswat. 
Katyayana. An ancient writer of great celebrity, author of the 
Dharmashastra. 
Kaupih. A loin-cloth. 
Kaushalya. Chief Queen of King Dasaratha and mother of Rama. 
5*3 
GLOSSARY 
Kaushika. Title of Vishwamitra after his grandfather. Also a 
devotee who went to hell for having pointed out a road to 
robbers, by which they pursued and killed some persons who 
were fleeing from them. 
Kaushiki. A river said to be Vishwamitra's sister. 
Kaustubha. Celebrated jewel churned from the ocean and worn 
by Shri Vishnu. 
Kavyahanas. A class of Celestial Beings. 
Keshni. Chief Queen of King Sagara. 
Khara. The brother of Ravana. A demon, slain by Rama, 
Khiva or Kheeva. Frumenty, hulled wheat boiled in milk and 
sweetened. 
Kinneras. Celestial Beings attendant on Kuvera q.v. 
Kirti. A celestial Nymph, personifying fame and glory. 
Kishkindha. The country ruled over by Bali, possibly Mysore. 
This Kingdom was given to Sugriva by Rama. 
Knower op Self. Knower of Truth or Reality. An illumined 
being. 
Koshala. The kingdom ruled over by King Dasaratha. 
Koti. Ten million. 
Koyashtika. The lapwing. 
Krauncha. A species of heron, Ardea Jaculator. 
Kraunchacharya. A Sage. 
Krauncharanya. A forest. Lit.; "The Forest of the Heron". 
Kraunchi. The daughter of Kashyapa and Tamra, mother of 
owls and birds of prey. 
Krikala. A partridge. 
Kaitabha and Madhu. Two Daityas who carried off the Vedas 
and were slain by Vishnu. 
Krittikas. The Pleiades, nurses of the God of War. 
Kshiroda. The Ocean of Milk. 
Kubija. A hunchback servant of Queen Kaikeyi. 
Kumbhakarna. Brother of Ravana, a monster killed by Rama. 
Kunjara. Maternal grandfather of Hanuman. 
Kurara. An osprey. 
Kusiia. One of the sons of Rama and Sita. 
Kuvera. The God of Wealth. 
Lagna-Karka. The sign of Cancer. 
Lagna-Meena. The sign of Pisces. 
Lagnas. The twelve signs of the Zodiac are considered as rising 
above the horizon in the course of the day. The Lagna has 
the name of the sign; its duration is from the first rising of 
514 
GLOSSARY 
the sign till the whole is above the horizon. Lagna literally 
means the point where the horizon and the path of the planet 
meet. 
Lakshmana. Son of King Dasaratha and Queen Sumitra, favourite 
brother of Rama who accompanied him in his exile. Lakshmana 
was said to be the incarnation of the thousand-headed Shesha, 
the serpent who upholds the world. 
Lakshmi. The consort of Shri Vishnu, also known as " Shri ", 
signifying prosperity. Sita was said to be an incarnation of 
Lakshmi. 
Lamba. A mountain. 
Lanka. The kingdom ruled over by Ravana, the King of the 
Titans, probably Ceylon. 
Lohitanga. The planet Mars. 
Lokapalas. The Guardians of the Four Quarters. 
Lomapada. A King whose story is told in Balakanda. 
Loshtha. A vessel of coconut or metal used for begging or cere monial purposes. 
M 
Mada. The temporal juices of an elephant in rut. 
Madana. God of Love, Kama or Kandarpa. 
Madha. A spiritous liquor, made of honey and molasses or the 
blossom of Bassia Latifolia. 
Madhu. A Demon. 
Madhucchanda. Vishwamitra's son, cursed by his father for 
disobedience. 
Madhuparka. A mixture of curds, butter, honey and the milk of 
the coconut, a traditional offering. 
Madhusudana. Name of Shri Vishnu, meaning the " Destroyer 
of the Demon Madhu ". 
Magadha. A kingdom ; now South Bihar. 
Magda-Phalguni. The season from the middle of January to 
the middle of March. 
Mahadeva. 'Great God/ a title of Shiva. 
Mahapadma. One of the Elephants of the Four Quarters. 
Maharathas. Car Warriors. 
Maharathras. Great Warriors. 
Mahatma. 'Great-souled One,* a title given to a Sage or Rishi. 
Mahavana. ' Great Forest.* 
Mahodara. A son of Vishwamitra's. Also a general in Ravana's 
army. 
Mahodaya. An ascetic who was transformed into one of the 
lowest caste by Vishwamitra's curse. 
515 9h 
GLOSSARY 
Maina. Mina or Mynah, a small percher about the size of a 
swallow which can be taught to repeat words. 
Maimaka or Minaka. A golden mountain, north of Kailasha. 
Also a numph who tempted Vishwamitra. 
Maireya or Mireya. Liquor extracted from the blossom of the 
Lythrum Fracticosum tree, mixed with sugar. 
Maithila or Mithila. The kingdom ruled over by King Janaka. 
Maithili. A name of Sita, as daughter of the King of Mithila. 
Maitra. Period of the early morning. 
Makara. A kind of sea monster, sometimes confounded with a 
shark, crocodile or dolphin. 
Malaya. A mountain. 
Manasarova. A lake on Mount Kailasha, lit. : " The Lake of 
the Mind ", said to be hollowed out of the mind of Brahma. 
Mandakini. A river near Mt. Chittrakuta. 
Mandara. A mountain used in the churning of the ocean by 
Gods and Titans. 
Mandarkani. A Sage who created the Lake of Five Nymphs. 
Mandavi. Bharata's wife, daughter of King Kushadwaja. 
Mandhata or Mandhatri. A king. 
Mandodari. The wife of Ravana. 
Mankuka. A musical instrument. 
Manmatha. A name of Kama, the God of Love. 
Manthara. The hunchbacked maid of Kaikeyi. 
Mantra. Mantras or mantrams are sacred formulas. 
Manu. The First Man who was given the Holy Truth by his 
father Vivaswat — see Bhagawadgita, Chapter IV, opening 
verses. 
Maricha. A demon who, disguised as a deer, lured Rama from 
bis hermitage. 
Marichipas. A class of ascetics who derive their nourishment 
from particles of light. 
Markandeya. A Sage, remarkable for bis austerities. 
Maruii. A name of Hanuman as son of Maruta, the God of Wind. 
Maruts. The Wind-Gods, or Gods of the Tempest. 
Mashas. A class of Sages or Hermits. 
Matali. Indra's charioteer. 
Matanga. A great Sage. 
Matarishwak. An aerial being, mentioned in the Rig-Veda as 
bringing down fire to earth. 
Maya. The deluding power of the Lord, by which the universe 
has come into existence and appears to be real. A Giant 
who created a magical cave dwelling. 
Mayavi. A giant killed by Bali. 
Megha. The Regent of the clouds. 
Merit. A great and sacred mountain. 
Mbrusavarm. A great ascetic. 
Mleccbas. Foreigners, barbarians, eaters of flesh. A people said 
5X6 
GLOSSARY 
to be born of the sacred cow Shabala for her protection. See 
Balakanda. 
Mbidanga. A kind of drum. 
Mbigi. Daughter of Krodhavasha, mother of elephants. 
Mkityu. The God of Death, another name for Yama. 
Muhurta. An instant, a moment, an hour, according to the 
context. 
Muni. A holy Sage, a pious and learned person, a title applied to 
Risliis and others. 
Muraga. A tambourine. 
Mushtikas. People cursed by Vishwamitra who assumed the 
lowest caste. 
N 
Nabhaga. The son of Yayati and father of Aja, who was Dasaratha's 
father. 
Nagas. The Serpent Race. 
Nahusha. The father of King Yayati, Nahusha's curious story is 
found in the Mahabharata and Puranas. 
Nairritas, A race of Demons, offspring of Nairriti or Niritti. 
Nakaprishta. The highest heaven (from Naka— vault) in which 
there is no unhappiness. 
Nakshatras. The Hindus, beside the common division of the 
Zodiac into twelve signs, divided it into 27 Nakshatras, two to 
each sign. Each Nakshatra has its appropriate name : — 
i. Aswini. 2. Bharani. 3. Krittika. 4. Rohini. 5. Mr'ga shriras. 6. Ardea. 7. Purnavasu. 8. Pushya. 9. Alesha. 
10. Magna, ri. Purva-phalguni. 12. Uttaraphalguni. 13. 
Hasta. 14. Chitra. 15. Svati. 16. Vishaka. 17. Anuradha. 
18. Jyasatha. 19. Mula. 20. Purvashadha. 21. Uttara shraddha. 22. Abijit. 23. Shravana. 24. Shravishtha or 
Dhanishta. 25. Shatabhishaj. 26. Purva Bhadrapada. 
27. Uttara-Bhadrapada. 28. Revati. 
(The last is used if Abijit is omitted.) 
Nala. A monkey chief, a general in Sugriva's army. 
Nalini. A river. 
Namuchi. A demon slain by Indra. 
Nandana. Indra's celestial garden. 
Nakdi. Sacred bull, the vehicle of Shiva, symbolising the Sattwa guna, q.v. 
Nandigrama. The city from which Bharara ruled in the absence 
of Rama. 
Narada. A divine Sage who appeared to Valroiki, see Balakanda. 
Naraka. Hell, a place of torture where the wicked are sent. Manu 
enumerates twenty hells. 
517 
GLOSSARY 
Narayana. A name of Shri Vishnu, so called because the waters 
(nara) were his first place of motion. 
Narmada. A river. 
Natyuha. A bird. A small galliuile. 
Nidhis. The personified Treasures of the God of Wealth, Kuvera. 
Nikumbhila. A grove on the outskirts of Lanka. 
Nila. A monkey chief, general in Sugriva's army. 
Nimi. A royal ancestor of King Janaka. 
Nishadas. A mountain tribe dwelling in the Vindhya Mountains, 
living on hunting. 
Nishka. A gold piece or nugget, sometimes worn as an ornament. 
Om. See Aum. 
Oshadi or Oshadi-Prastha. " The Place of Medicinal Herbs ,: 
a city in the Himalayas mentioned in ' Kumara-Sambhava.' 
Padma. A measurement, a thousand billions. 
Pahlava. Warriors born from the sacred cow Shabala, possibly 
Persians. See Balakanda. 
Paka. A demon slain by Indra. 
Pampa. A lake by which Rama and Lakshmana rested in their 
exile. 
Panava. A tabor or cymbal. 
Panchapsaras. * The Lake of Five Nymphs ' created by the Sage 
Mandarkami. 
Pakchavati. A district near the source of the Godaveri River 
where Rama passed a period of his exile. 
Pannagas. Celestial serpents, offspring of Kadru. 
Paramarishis. Great or Supreme Rishis, q.v. 
Paramatman. The Absolute, Brahman. 
Parantapa. A title meaning " Oppressor of the Foe". 
Parasurama. 'Rama with the axe,' the sixth incarnation of Shri 
Vishnu, son of Yamadagni and Renuka. 
Pariharyas. A bracelet. 
Pariplava. A spoon used in sacrifices. 
Pariyatra. One of the principal mountain ranges of India. 
Parjanya. A Vedic Deity or Rain God. Sometimes this title is 
used for Indra. 
Parvan. The period of the moon's change. 
Parvati. Shiva's consort, also known under many other names, 
such as Bahravi, Devi, Girija, Kanya, Sari, Padma-Lanchana, 
518 
GLOSSARY 
Shiva-Duti, Uma and countless others. 
Pashupati. Lord of Creatures, a title of Shiva. 
Patagas. Winged creatures. 
PATAHA. A kind of drum. 
Patala. The infernal regions. 
Paulastya. See Poulastya. 
Pautoma. Wife of Kashyapa, mother of the Danavas. 
Pavaka. A name of Agni, the God of Fire. 
Pavana. The God of the Wind, father of Hanuman. 
Payasa. A preparation of rice and milk. 
Phalguni. A Nakshatra, q.v. 
PlHAKA. Sacred bow. 
Pingas. " Tawny Ones ", a name given to the monkey race. 
Pisachas. Ghosts or evil spirits. 
Prrnus. Manes or Ancestors. 
Plavagas or Plavamgamas. Those who move by leaps and bounds; 
a tide given to the Monkey Race. 
Poulastya. One of the Seven Immortal Sages, Grandfather of 
Ravana. 
Pkabha. The consort of the Moon, also the personification of the 
light of the Sun. 
Prabhakara. The Sun. 
Prabhava. A minister of Sugriva's. 
Pradakshina. Circumambulation in a reverent manner from left 
to right. 
Prahasta. Father of Jambavan, a general in Sugriva's army. 
Pralamba. A mountain. 
Pralaya. Period of the dissolntion of the world. 
Pramathin. A monkey renowned for his courage, 
Prana. The vital air or breath. 
Prasravana. A mountain. 
Pratyaksthali. A sacred grove, a site facing the West. 
Prausthapada. August— September. 
Phayaga. The confluence of the Ganges and the Yamuna, a 
sacred spot. 
Prishata. Spotted deer, cow or piebald horse. 
Priyaka. A spotted deer. 
Puxoman. A Danava, father of Sachi, consort of India. 
PUMARVASU. The seventh and most auspicious Nakshatra, q.v. 
Puranas. Legends and tales of ancient times in epic form. There 
are eighteen chief Puranas. 
Purandara. Destroyer of Cities, a title of Indra. 
Purohtta. A family priest. 
Pururavas. A king who wedded the nymph Urvashi. 
Purusha. The supreme Spirit, the highest Reality. 
Pushan. The Sun. 
PusHPAKA. A celestial aerial chariot which was so vast that it 
contained palaces and their precincts. 
519 
GLOSSARY 
Pushpitaka. A mountain. 
Pushya. A constellation of three stars considered auspicious. 
Also the sixth lunar mansion. 
Puttra. A son who is said to deliver his father from hell. 
Puttresti. A ceremony performed for the extending of the race by 
the birth of sons. 
Raghava. A title of those belonging to the House of Raghu to 
which King Dasaratha and his forbears belonged. 
Rahu. A mythical demon said to cause the eclipse of the sun and 
the moon. 
Rajahamsa. Royal Swan or Flamingo. 
Rajas. See Guna. 
Rajasuya Sacrifice. A great sacrifice performed in ancient times 
at the installation of a monarch. 
Rakshasas. Demons or Titans. 
Rakshasi. Female Titan or Demon. 
Rama or Ramachandra. The Incarnation of Shri Vishnu and the 
eldest son of King Dasaratha. It is round this great figure 
that the 'Ramayana' was created. 
Rama-Katha. The recitation of 'Ramayana' which has been a 
tradition in India for thousands of years. 
Rambha. A nymph symbolising the perfection of beauty from 
Indra's realm; often sent to distract Sages from their pious 
practices. 
Ratha. A chariot. 
Rati. The Consort of the God of Love. 
Ratna. A necklace. 
Ravaha. A Titan, the King of Lanka who carried off Sita and 
was slain by Rama. The name means the ' Vociferous ' 
' One who roars.' 
Ravi. The Sun. 
Renuka. The wife of Yamadagni and mother of Parasurama. 
RiKSHABHA. A mountain. 
Rikshabila. The magical cave where the monkeys stayed for a 
time, when searching for Sita. 
Riksharajas. The father of Bali and Sugriva, a King of the 
Monkeys. 
Rikshas. The Bears. 
Rishi. A great Sage or illumined being of which there are four 
classes : — 
Rajarishi— A royal Rishi, 
5*> 
GLOSSARY 
Maharishi— A great Rishi, 
Brahmarishi — A sacred Rishi, 
Devarishi — A divine Rishi. 
Rishyamuka. A mountain on which Sugriva took refuge. 
Rishyashringa. The " Deer-horned " Son of the Sage Vibhandaka 
who married the daughter of King Lomapada, Shanty and 
later performed the Puttresti ceremony (q. v.) for King Dasaratha 
Ritvijs. Priest officiating at the installation ceremony. 
Rom. A fish, Cyprinus Rohita Ham. 
Rohini. The star Aldebaran. 
Rohita. A kind of deer. 
Rohitas. Name of the horses of the sun, also a Deity celebrated 
in the Atharva Veda, probably a form of Fire or the Sun. 
Rudra. A name of Shiva. 
Rudras. The sons of Kashyapa and Aditi. 
Ruma. Sugriva's Consort. 
Rumana. Sugriva's general, a monkey chief. 
Ruru. A deer. 
Sachi. India's Consort. 
Sadhyas. The personified rites and prayers of the Vedas who 
dwell between heaven and earth, a class of Deities. 
Sagara. A King whose history is told in Balakanda. 
Sampati. A vulture, brother of Jatayu. 
Samudra. Lord of Rivers, the Ocean. 
Sanatkumara. One of the mind-born sons of Brahma. 
Santana. One of the five trees in Indra's Paradise. 
Sapindi. The Sapindi Ceremony is for the establishing of a 
connection with kindred through funeral offerings. 
Saptajanas. The * Hermitage of the Seven Sages.1 
Sarabha or Sharabha. Legendary animal with eight legs. 
Saranga. A bird. 
Saraswati. The Goddess of speech and learning, also a river 
named after her. 
Sarayu. Sacred river, the Sarju. 
Sarvabhauma. The elephant that carries Kuvera q.v. 
Satarhada. Mother of the Demon Viradha. 
Satyavati. The sister of the Sage Vishwamitra ; she became the 
Kaushika river. 
Satya-Yuga. The Golden Age or Yuga. There are four Yugas 
which make up a Kalpa or world cycle :— 
The Satya Yuga or Golden Age. 
The Treta Yuga or Silver Age. 
The Dwapara Yuga or Copper Age. 
521 
GLOSSARY 
The Kali Yuga or Black Age, also called the Iron Age. 
Saumanasa. One of the elephants of the four quarters. 
Saumitri. Sumatra's son, Lakshmana. 
Sausa. A divine potion. Lit. : " Relating to the Sun ". 
SaovaRCALA. Sochal salt or alkali. 
Shabari. A female ascetic, devotee of Rama. 
Shakra. A name of Indra's. 
Shalmali. A fabulous thorny rod of the cotton tree used for tortur ing the wicked in hell. 
Shalyaka. A Porcupine. See also Weapons. 
Shambara. The Demon of Drought, represented in the Rig Veda 
as the enemy of Indra. 
Shankhas. A measurement, a hundred billions or a hundred 
thousand crores. (A crore is ten millions). 
Shamku. Ten billions. 
Shanta. The daughter of King Lomapada who was wedded to 
the Sage Rishyashringa. 
Sharabanda. The mother of the Demon Viradha. 
Sharabhanga. A Sage visited by Rama and Sita in the Dandaka 
Forest. 
Shasanka. The Consort of Robini or the moon. 
Shasi. The moon. Lit. : " Hare-marked ". 
Shastras. Teachings of divine and recognised authority. 
Shatananda. Son of the Sage Gautama and spiritual director 
to the King Janaka. 
Shatapatra. " Having a hundred petals ". (See Lotus, under 
* Flowers and Trees Glossary.') ' Having a hundred feathers,' 
said of a peacock or crane. ' Having a hundred wings ' or 
conveyances, said of Brihaspati, q.v. 
Shatrughna. King Dasaratha's fourth son, whose mother was 
Sumitra. 
Shishumara. Lit. : ' Child-killer ', a word used for crocodile, 
porpoise or dolphin. 
Shiva. The Lord as Destroyer of Ignorance, also Lord of Bliss. 
Shivya or Shivi. A King of the Raghu Dynasty who rescued the 
God Agni when he had transformed himself into a pigeon and 
was pursued by Indra, in the form of a hawk. 
Shona. A sacred river. 
Shravana. The month of July — August. Also a Nakshatra, q.v. 
Shri. A title of courtesy, also the Consort of Vishnu, Lakshmi, 
who is the Goddess of Prosperity. 
Shruta-Ktrti. The Consort of Shatrughna. 
Shruti or sruti. Holy teachings h't. : " What is heard ". 
Shudra. The lowest of the four castes. 
Shukra. The planet Venus. Said to be the son of Brighu. 
Shuhaka. Son of the Sage Ricbika. 
Shumashepa. Son of the Sage Ricbika, offered as a sacrifice and 
saved by the Sage Vishwamitra. 
522 
GLOSSARY 
Shurpanakha. Sister of Ravana, a female Titan mutilated by 
Rama and Lakshmana. 
Shvadamshtras. Earrings. 
Shvasana. A name of the Wind-god. Also of the Demon of 
Drought slain by Indra. 
Shyenas. Falcons, hawks, eagles, etc., the offspring of Shyeni. 
Shyeni. Daughter of Kashyapa and Tamra, mother of birds of 
Shveta. A mountain. 
Siddharta. One of King Dasaratha's counsellors. 
Siddhas. Semi-divine beings, who dwell between the earth and 
the sun. 
Sn>HU. A kind of rum distilled from molasses. 
Simhika, Sinhika or Singhika. A female demon who caught 
hold of Hanuman's shadow. 
Sindhu. The river Indus. Also a country east of Koshala. 
Sita. Daughter of King Janaka, King of Mithila, and Rama's 
consort. 
Six Kinds of Taste. Sweet, bitter, acid, salt, pungent, acrid 
and harsh. 
Smkiti. Tradition. Lit. : " What is remembered ". 
Soma. The fermented juice of ' Asclepias-acida ', used as a 
beverage or libation in sacred ceremonies. 
Somadatta. Daughter of Urmila and mother of Brahmadatta. 
Somagiri. A mountain. 
Soijka 1 
a. f 
Countries east of Koshala. 
SOURASHTRA. 
Srimaras. Marine monsters. 
Sthulashira. A Sage harassed by the Demon Kabandha. 
Subahu. A demon who disturbed the sacrifices of the Sage 
Vishwamitra. 
Subhadra. A sacred tree. 
Suchena. Son of Varuna, the Lord of the Waters. 
Sudamana. One of King Janaka's ministers. 
SUGRIVA. King of the Monkeys and Rama's ally. 
Sumantra. The Prime Minister of King Dasaratha. 
Sumati. Younger wife of King Sagara, who gave birth to sixty thousand sons. 
Sumeru. A sacred mountain. 
Sumitra. Mother of Lakshmana and Shatrughna. 
Sunabha. Lit. : " Having a beautiful navel , a title of the moun tain Mainaka. 
Sunda. Father of Maricha. 
Suparna. A name of Garuda, meaning " Chief of Birds ". 
Suparshwa. Son of the Vulture Sampati. 
Suprabha. A Goddess who created celestial weapons, daughter of 
Daksha. 
Surabha. Daughter of Krodhavasha, consort of Kashyapa. 
523 
GLOSSARY 
Suras. A name of the Gods. In the Vedas it applied to offspring 
of the Sun. 
Surashtras. One of King Dasaratha's ministers. 
Surya. The Sun, one of the three chief deities of the Vedas. 
Sushena. The father of Tara, Bali's consort. 
Sutikshna. A Sage who dwelt in the Dandaka Forest and enter- 
tained Rama, Lakshmana and Sita during their wanderings. 
Suta. Khara's charioteer. 
Sutras. Poetical rhythms or stanzas. 
Suvarhala. The consort of the Sun. 
Suyajna. Spiritual Director of King Dasaratha. 
Svadangstras. Ornaments worn in the ears. 
Svaha. Word of power or invocation. 
Svarbhanu. The Demon Rahu, q.v. 
Svati. The star Arcturus. 
Svavidh. A Porcupine or Hedgehog. 
Swvambhu. The Self-Existence, a name of the Creator, Shri 
Brahma. 
Swyamprabha. The Daughter of the Sage Merusavarni. 
Swyamvara. The ceremony of choosing a consort. 
Syakdara. A river. 
Tala. A leather strap used by archers. A clapper used in music. 
Tamasa. A river, 
Tamra. One of the wives of the Sage Kashyapa. 
Tapas. Penance or austerity. 
Tapovana. A forest. 
Tara. The consort of Bali. 
Taraka. A female demon. 
Tarkshya. In ancient times considered as the personification of 
the sun in the form of a bird. Later it became a name for 
Garuda. 
Tarrshyas. Father of the Monkeys. 
Tejas. Lustre, energy or radiance, often used for spiritual power. 
Thirty The, Tri-Dasa. This title applies to the Gods. In round 
numbers, thirty-three — Twelve Adityas, eight Vasus, eleven 
Rudras and two Ashwins. 
Three Worlds The. Bhur, Bhuvah, Swah, the Lower, Middle 
and Upper Worlds, also called Tri-Loka and Tri-Bhuvana. 
Heaven, Earth and HelL 
Tilaka. A mark of auspiciousness placed on the forehead. 
Timingila. Lit. : " Swallowing even a Timis ", a name of a 
fabulous fish. 
Timis. A whale. 
524 
GLOSSARY 
Tishya. An asterism shaped like an arrow, containing three 
stars, also called Pushya and Sidhya. 
Twjata. A Brahmin whose story is told in Balakanda. Also a 
female titan who spoke in defence of Sita. 
Trikuta. " Three-Peaked ", the mountain on which Lanka was 
built. 
Tripathaga. " Three-way flowing ", the Traverser of the Three 
Worlds, a name of the Ganges. 
Tripura. A demon slain by Shiva. A city burnt by the Gods. 
Trishanku. A King of the Solar Race, whose story is told in 
Balakanda. 
Trishiras. A demon slain by Rama. 
Trivikrama. The name of Shri Vishnu, when taking the three 
strides covering the earth. 
Trivistafa. The world of Indra. 
Tryambaka. " Three-eyed " a name of Shiva. 
Twice-Born. Only a brahmin can strictly be termed *' twice born ", but the term came to be extended to the warrior and 
agricultural classes. 
Tumboru. A Gandharva cursed by the God Kuvera and born as 
the Demon Viradha. 
U 
Ucchaihshravas. The white horse of Indra's, produced from 
the churning of the ocean. It is said to be fed on ambrosia 
and be the King of Horses. 
Udaya. A golden mountain. 
Uma. A name of Parvati, daughter of Himavat and consort of 
Shiva. 
Upa-Naya. The ceremony of investiture of the sacred thread, by 
which act spiritual birth is conferred on a youth and he is 
considered a member of the Brahmin or Twice-born class. 
The age at which this ceremony takes place is between eight 
and sixteen years. 
Upanishad. Esoteric doctrine. The third division of the Vedas, 
forming part of the revealed World. 
Upendra. Name of Shri Vishnu or Krishna. 
Uragas. Great Serpents. 
Ukmila. Consort of Lakshmana. 
Urvashi. A nymph mentioned in the Rig-Veda. Many legends 
are told about her in the classics. 
Ushanas. Another name of Shukra or the planet Venus. 
Ushiras. A hair like grass growing on the golden trees in hell. 
See also Flowers and Trees Glossary. 
Uttara-Kurus. Northern Kurus, a people with whom the Sages 
took refuge. 
525 
GLOSSARY 
Uttara-Phalguni. A constellation, under which Sita was said 
to have been bom. 
Vachaspati. Mother of the Gods, Goddess of speech and learning. 
Vadaba or Vadava. Lit : ' Mare's Fire ', the subterranean fire 
or fire of the lower regions, fabled to emerge from a cavity 
called the ' Mare's mouth ' under the sea at the south pole. 
Vagarinasaka. A bird, dark throated and white winged. Also 
a species of food. 
Vaideha or Videha. The kingdom ruled over by Janaka. 
Vaidehi. A name of Sita as daughter of the King of Videha. 
Vaikhanasas. A class of Rishi or Hermit. 
Vairochana. A name of Bali. 
Vaishnava. Sacrifice in honour of Shri Vishnu. 
Vaishravana. A name of Kuvera, Ravana's brother. 
Vaishvanara. A name of the God Agni. 
Vaishyas. The merchant or agricultural class. 
Vaitarani. The River of Hell. 
Vaivaswat. A name of the God Yama. 
Vajapeya. A sacrifice at which an acetous mixture of meal and 
water is offered to the Gods. 
Vajradhara. " Wielder of the Thunderbolt ", a name for Indra, 
Valakhilyas. Divine Beings, the size of a thumb, sixty thousand 
of whom sprang from the body of Brahma and surround the 
chariot of trie sun. 
Vali. See Bali. 
Vallaki. A small crane, also an Indian lute. 
Valmiki. Poet, Sage, author of Ramayana. 
Vamana. The Holy Dwarf, fifth divine Incarnation of Shri Vishnu. 
Vamadeva. A great Rishi, present at Rama's installation. 
Vana. Forest. 
Vanaprastha. A festival similar to a Harvest Festival. 
Vanaras. 'Dweller in the Forest,' a title given to the Monkey Race, 
also called ' Deer of the Trees '. 
Vanaris. Female Monkeys. 
Vanculaka. A mythical bird. 
Varuna. The Indian Neptune, Lord of the Waters. 
Varijnl Daughter of Varuna, the personification of Wine. 
Vasava. A name for Indra. 
Vasishtha. The spiritual preceptor of King Dasaratha. 
Vasudeva. A name of the Lord. 
Vasuki. The Serpent King. 
Vasus. Sons of Kashyapa and Aditi. The eight Vasus were 
originally personifications of natural phenomena, Apa, Dhruva, 
Soma, Dhara, Anila, Anala, Praryusha and Prabhasa. 
Vasvokasara. Another name for Amaravati, Indra's capital. 
5z6 
GLOSSARY 
Vata. A name of Vayu, q.v. 
Vatapi. A demon consumed by the Sage Agastya. 
Vayu. The God of the Wind. 
Veda. The Holy Scriptures of the Hindu religion. Fountain of 
Divine Knowledge. 
Vedangas. A sacred science considered subordinate to and in 
some sense a part of the Vedas — six subjects come under the 
denomination : — 
i. Siksha — pronunciation. 2. Kalpa — religious rites. 3. 
Vyakarana— Grammar. 4, Chandas— Prosody. 5. Jyotish 
— Astronomy. 5. Nirukti — Explanation of difficult words. 
Vedi. An altar of Kusha grass. Place of sacrifice. 
Vibhandaka. Son of the Sage Kashyapa and father of 
Rishyashringa. 
Vibishana. See Bibishana. 
Vibhudhas. Celestial Beings. 
Vidarbha. A country} probably Birar, whose capital was Kun dinapura. 
Videha. See Vaideha. 
Vidhatar. " Arranger ", " Disposer ", " Creator ". Name of 
Brahma. 
VmHYADHARAS. Lit. : " Magical knowledge holder ". Particular 
good or evil spirits attendant on the Gods. 
Vina. An Indian lute. 
Vinata. The mother of Garuda. 
Vindha. The auspicious hour for finding what has been lost. 
Vindhya. A mountain ordered by Agastya not to increase in 
height. 
Vipanci. An Indian lute. 
Vihadha. A demon, son of Java and Shatarade who was slain by 
Rama and had formerly been the Gandharva Tumburu. 
Virochana. A giants father of Bali. 
ViRUPAKSHA. Elephant of one of the Four Quarters. 
Vishakas. One of the lunar asterisms, also a month of the flower ing season. 
Vishnu. The Lord in His aspect of Maintainer of the Universe. 
Vishravas. Son of Poulastya and father of Ravana and Kuvera. 
Vishwadevas. All the Gods, said to be " Preserver of Men and 
Bestowers of Rewards ". 
ViSHWAKARMA. Architect of the Gods. 
Vishwamitra. A great Sage whose story is told in Balakanda. 
Vishwarupa. A title of Vishnu meaning " wearing all forms " 
"Omnipresent." Also the son of Vishwakarma slain by Indra. 
Vishwatam. The God of the Wind. 
Vitapavati. The celestial city of Kuvera. 
VrvASWAT. ' The Brilliant One ', a title given to the Sun. 
Vrtoda. A large number, a multitude. 
Vritrasura or Vrttra. A demon slain by Indra. 
3*7 
GLOSSARY 
Y 
Yadu. The son of Yayati and Devayani. Yayati was the founder 
of the Yadavas in which lice Krishna was born. 
Yajna. A sacrifice or penance. 
Yajurveoa. The part of the Veda that treats of ceremonies and 
rites. 
Yakshas. Supernatural Beings attendant on the God Kuvera. 
Yama. The God of Death. 
Yamuna. A sacred river. 
Yatudhanas. Evil spirits that assume various forms. 
Yavanas. A people said to have been born of the sacred cow 
Shabala. 
Yayati. The son of Nahusha, a forbear of King Dasaratha. His 
story appears in the Mahabharata and Vishnu Purana. 
Yoga. A School of Philosophy of which the most important is 
Adwaita, the non-dualist system elaborated by Shri Shankara charya. 
Yojana. A measurement. Approximately four or five miles. 
Yuga. A world age or period. The Yugas are four in number 
and their duration several thousands of years. Between each 
of the periods there is a time of Sandhya or Twilight when 
creation is withdrawn and lies latent or potential in the Supreme 
Spirit or Brahman. The Yugas are called Krita, Treta, 
Dwapara and Kali. 
52» 
FLOWERS AND TREES 
(Wherever possible an English equivalent has been given or some 
description of the plant or tree ; some however could not be traced) 
Agnimukha. Semicarpus Anancardium Zcylanica, the Plumbago 
or Plumbago Zeylanica. A white flowered shrub., that blooms 
in June or July ; its flowers are set in spikes. The plant is 
medicinal. 
Agnimukhya. The Marking Nut plant. 
Amlaka. Phyllanthus Emblica. A many branched shrub re sembling Hemlock. 
Amra. Mango Mangifera Indica. A short-trunked tree covered 
with evergreen foliage, which flowers from January to March, 
the blossom being partly white and pardy greenish yellow 
with an orange stripe on each petal. 
Ankola or Ankota, Angolata, Ankotha. Alangium Hexapetalum. 
A poison, Ankola-sara, is prepared from this plant. 
Aravinda. Nymphoea Nelumbo, a water-lily. 
Arista. Sapindus Saponeria, the Soap plant. 
Arjuna or Arjunaka. Terminalia Arjuna, a species of Nimba 
tree. A tall evergreen tree usually found on the banks of 
streams. The leaves cluster at the end of the branches and 
the flowers are tiny. The Arjuna-Jarul, is the Queens flower 
or Crepe flower. 
Asana. Terminalia Tormentosa or, the plant Marsilla Quadrifolia. 
The first is a common forest tree yielding excellent timber 
similar to the Arjuna tree and rarely seen outside forest areas. 
Asiioka. Saraca Indica. A small evergreen tree which produces 
a profusion of orange and scarlet clusters in January and 
February with deep green shining foliage. Buddha was said 
to have been born under an Ashoka tree and Sita was kept by 
Ravana in an Ashoka Grove. Both Buddhists and Hindus 
regard it as sacred. It is medicinal. 
Ashwa-Karna. Vatica Robusta. 
Ashwa-Lagna. The Saul Tree. 
Ashwattha. The Fig Tree, of which there are many varieties :— 
Ficus Bengalensis — The Banian Tree. 
Ficus Religiosa— The Pipal or Peepal or Bo Tree. 
Ficus Glomerata— Rumbal or Umbar. 
Ficus Elastica— The Indian Rubber Tree. 
529 
GLOSSARY 
Atimukha. Premna Spinoza. The wood by which attrition is 
produced. 
Atimuktas. Gaertnera Racemosa. 
B 
Badri or Vadri. Zixyphus Jujuba. The Jujube Plant. 
Bakula or Vakula. Mimisops Elengi. 
Balalaka. Flacourtia Caiaphracta. A shrub with hairy leaves 
and edible fruit ; the fine grained wood is used for turnery 
and combs. Flowers in March or April. 
Banjula or Vanjula. Hibiscus Mutabilis. 
Bandhujiva. Pentapetes Phoenicea. A plant with a red flower 
which opens at midday and withers away next morning at 
sunrise. 
Bhandira. Mimosa Seressa, a lofty fig tree. 
Bhanduka. Calosanthcs Indica. 
Bhava. Indian Laburnum. Monkeys are particularly partial to 
the sweet pulp in which the seeds lie. 
Bhavya. Dillenia Indica alias Dillenia elliptica speciosa. A tree that 
grows to forty feet; it is an evergreen; the flowers are large, 
white with yellow antlers and appear at the end of the branches. 
This tree is found in dense forests in the north and is much 
cultivated round temples. The bark and leaves are medicinal 
and the juice from the acid fruit mixed with sugar forms a 
cooling drink. There is another small fruit tree allied to the 
•Magnolia Speciosa' of this name. 
Bhaya. Trapa Bispinosa. 
Bijapura. Citrus Medica. Citron Tree. 
Bilwa. Aegle Marmelos, commonly called Bel. Wood apple 
which bears a delicious fruit that unripe is used for medicinal 
purposes ; its leaves are used in the ceremonies of the worship 
of Shiva. 
Bimba or Vimba. Momordica Monadelpha. A plant bearing a 
bright red gourd. 
Chamikara. Thorn apple. 
Champaka. A species of Magnolia. 
Chandaka. Clove. 
Chandana. Sirium Folium. Red or False Sandalwood. It 
bears straw-coloured flowers changing to deep purple. 
Chandata. Nerium Odorum. Sweet-scented Oleander Rosebay. 
Cuta, Mango. 
530 
GLOSSARY 
Dadima. Common Pomegranate. Bears double flowers. 
Dadina. Punica Granatum. Pomegranate. A shrub with large 
red flowers and hard globose fruit. 
Devadaru. A variety of pine. 
Deva Parna. The Divine Leaf. A medicinal plant. 
Dhanvana. Grewia Asiatica. Also, under different spellings, 
various other plants. 
Dhanwaria. Echites Antidy Senterio. A Twining Plant. 
Dhara. Woodfordia Horebunda. A small spreading shrub from 
which red dye is obtained from the bright red flowers. Also 
a species of Acacia. 
Dhatri. Sterospermum Aciderifolium. 
Dhatura. Datura Stramonium L. (Solanaceae) Thorn apple. 
A poisonous drug is made from this tree. 
Dhuva. One of the Acacia family. 
Durva Grass. Panicum Dactylon. Bent Grass. 
Gajapushpi. Elephant Flower. A sort of Arum. 
Goshirshaka. A Sandal-tree. 
Gular. A resinous tree, fragments of which are put into the 
water in a loshta for ceremonial purposes. 
Harishyama. See Shyama. 
Hintala. Phoenix Sylvestus. The Marshy Date Tree. 
Jambu. Eugenia Jambolana. The Rose Apple or Java Plum. 
Jamnu. Frunus Padus L. Bird Cherry. 
531 2M 
GLOSSARY 
Kadala. Musa Sapientum. A plantain. It has a soft perishable 
stem and is poetically as a symbol of the frailty of human life. 
Kadamba. Nauclea Cadumba, a plant. 
Kahlara. A white water lily. 
Kakubha. Terminalia Arjuna. A tall evergreen tree with a 
smooth grey bark often tinged with green or red ; usually 
found on the banks of streams. The creamy honey-scented 
flowers appear from March to June. 
Kamanari. A species of Mimosa. 
Kamranga. Averrhoa Carambola. 
Kanya. The name given to several plants, one of which is a 
tuberose plant growing in Kashmir. Also the Aloe Perfbliata. 
Kafimuka. The Coffee plant. 
Kapitha. The Jack Fruit. 
Karavira. Another fragrant Oleander, common in many parts of 
India in the rocky stream beds and the lower Himalayas, 
fringing roads and rivers. The foliage is evergreen throughout 
the year but at its height during the rains, the colours are 
deep rose, pink and white, single and double. The sap is 
poisonous. 
Karnikara. Pterospternum Acerfolium also called Cassia Fistula 
commonly called Kaniyar. 
Karpura. Ficus Glomerata or Wild Fig. In April the new leaves 
of shining dark red, lend it a beautiful appearance. 
Kasanari. Gmelina Arborea. The Liquonce plant. 
Kashas. Reeds or Rushes. 
Kashasthali. Bignonia Suaveolens. The Trumpet Flower. 
Kedumbra. A Tree with fragrant orange-coloured flowers. 
Ketaka. Pandanus Odoratissimus. 
Khadira. Acacia Catechu. The Areca or Betel-nut Palm, which 
grows in the hot damp coastal regions of southern India and 
Ceylon. Betel nut is the fruit universally chewed by Asian 
peoples. 
Khakjdka. Phoenix Sylvestris. Wild Date Palm or Toddy Palm. 
The leaves are greyish green ; the scented flowers appear in 
March. The fruit is used for preserves and palm wine. 
Kichakas. Arundo Karka. A reed. The name is also given to 
a hollow bamboo or rattling cane and a tree. 
Kimshuka or Kumshuka. Butea Frondosa. Having beautiful 
orange flowers and a quantity of milky sticky juice. This tree 
is called the " Flame of the Forest " or the " Parrot Tree ". 
From January to March it is a mass of orange and vermilion ; 
the flowers are unscented. 
532 
GLOSSARY 
Kovidara. Banhinia Variegata, also the " Tree of Paradise. ** 
One of the loveliest of Indian trees with a dark brown smoothish 
bark. The leaves fall in the cold season and the large sweetly 
scented flowers open on the bare branches. Their colour 
varies from magenta, mauve, pink with crimson markings or 
white with a splash of yellow. 
Kkitamala. Cassia Fistula. Indian Laburnum. Also the com mon Bottle Flower. 
Kuayral. Mountain Ebony. 
Kujaja. Wrightia Awtidy Senterica. A medicinal plant. 
Kumuda. A white water lily. 
Kunda. Jasmine Multiflorum. 
Kuraka. Boswellia Thorifera. OUvanum Tree. 
KURANOA. A plant commonly called Sakarunda. 
Kurubaka. Dronapushpi. The Drona flower. Drona meaning 
a vessel, cup or pot, it probably produces a gourd. 
Kusha Grass. Demostachya Bipennata. Sacred Grass used for 
religious ceremonies. This grass has long stalks and pointed 
leaves like rushes. 
Kuvala. A water lily. 
jAi " * Artocarpus Lacucha. The same genus as the Jack 
Lakuka f *7ru*t> cultivated in the plains of Northern India. 
Lohdra. Simplocos Racemosa. The bark of this tree is used 
as a dye. 
M 
Madhava. A Mango. 
Madhavi. Bassia Latifolia. A species of leguminous plant. Also 
Basil and a kind of Panic grass. 
Madhuka. Bassia Latifolia. Illipi Butter Tree. A large deci duous tree with thick grey bark found in dry rocky hill regions. 
Valuable for its delicious and nutritive flowers which bloom 
at night and fall to the ground at dawn. They taste some thing like figs and are much sought after by bears, birds and 
deer, so that the natives have to guard the trees in order to 
collect flowers for themselves. 
Madhura. Perennial Jasmine. 
Madura. A tree reminiscent of Cassia which has long sprays of 
pale pink flowers. 
Mallika. Evening Jasmine. 
Muchukunda. Pterospernum Suberifolium. A white variety of 
Thorn Apple. 
Muchulinda. Possibly connected with the Muchi wood or Coral 
Tree. 
533 
GLOSSARY 
N 
Naga. Mesua Ferrea. A small tree. 
Nagavriksha. A mountain shrub. 
Naktamala or Naktamallaka. Caleduba Arborea or Dalbergia 
Arborea or Pongamia Glabra. 
Nalina. Nelumbium Speciosum. A water lily. 
Narcal Grass. Phragmites Karka Trin. A species of Reed. 
Narikexa. Coconut Palm. 
Nichula. fiarringtonia Acutangola commonly called Hijjal. 
Nilashoka. An Ashoka with blue flowers. 
Nilotpala. The Blue Lotus. 
Nimba. Azadirachta Indica. A tree with bitter fruit, the leaves 
of which are chewed at funerals. 
Nipa, Nipaka. A species of Kadamba Tree. 
NivARA or Naivara. Wild Rice. 
Nyagrodha. Ficus Indies. Indian Fig Tree. 
Padma. A pink lotus. 
Padmaka. Costus Speciosus or Arabicus, a kind of Fir. 
Pakasa. Arto Carpus Intergrifolia. Jack-fruit Tree, bearing the 
largest edible fruit in the world, weighing up to ioo lbs., 
oblong or round and irregular. This fruit is in great demand 
but less favoured than the mango or plantain. This tree 
grows in the forests in the Western Ghats. 
Parabhadraka. Erythrininina Fulgens. Coral Tree, which bears 
angular spikes of rich red blooms along its bare branches 
from January to March. 
Patala. Tropical evergreen climbing plant. 
Patau or Patalika. Bynaria Suaroleus, a tree with sweet 
scented blossom (possibly the red Lodhra). 
Pinjara. Mesua Roxburghii. 
Pippala. Sacred Fig Tree. 
Piyala or Priyala or Pryala. Commonly called Piyal. Found 
in Central India. Broad-leafed Mohwah. Common oil plant 
Also a vine-like plant. 
Plaksha. Ficus Infectoria. Wavy-leafed Fig Tree. 
Priyakanya. Tenninalia Tormentosa. 
PRYANKARA. Various plants. 
Punnaga. Rottleria Tinctoria. The flowers of this tree produce 
a yellow dye. 
Purna. A Cypress. 
Purnasa. Sacred Basil. 
534 
GLOSSARY 
Q 
R 
Raktachandan. The red Sandal Tree. 
Rajiva. A red Lotus. 
Ranjaka. Barbadoes Pride. The Red Wood or Coral Pea Tree. 
Sala. Shorea Robusta. The Sal Tree. 
Sallaka. Bignonia Indica. The Gum Tree. 
Sangandhika. The White and Blue Water-lily. 
Sapta. A kind of grass. Sacharum Cylindricum. 
Saptacchada. Seven-leafed Milk Plant or Poon Tree or Devil's 
Tree. 
Saptaparna. Alstonia or Echites Scholaris. Lit. : Seven-leafed 
Tree. 
Sarala. Pinus Longifolia. A species of Pine. 
SAHJA. White Murdah. 
Saspat Grass. Saccharium Bengalense Retz. (S. Sara Roxb.). 
One of the sugar canes. 
Shami. Acacia Suma. This tree possesses very tough and hard 
wood supposed to contain fixe— it is employed to kindle the 
sacred fires by rubbing two bits together. Also the shrub 
Serratula anthelmintica. 
Shaivala. Vallisneria Octandra or Bexica. An aquatic plant. 
Shalmali. The Silk Cotton Tree. 
Shimshapa or Shimgshapa. Dattergia Sisu. An Ashoka. 
Shirashaka. Probably a form of fragrant Sirissa. 
Shiribilwa, see Bilwa. 
Skirisha. Acacia Sirissa. 
Shdushkapir. One of the Sirissas. Bears a small white flower 
which is fragrant at night. This tree yields a gum similar to 
Gum Arabic. Its seeds are used for opthalmic diseases and 
are useful in leprosy. 
Shyama. An extensive dark-blue climber. Also Datura Mete!. 
A Thorn apple. 
Sillea. Cephalostashyum Capitatum Munro. A large Bamboo. 
Simhakesara. Cassia Sianica. 
Sindhuvara. Vitex Negundo, a small tree. 
Sura. A Sal tree. 
Svadamshtra. Astercantha Longifolia. 
Syandara. Dalbergia Ougeninensis. 
535 
GLOSSARY 
Takkola. Pinieta Acris. 
TAtA. Borassus Flabelliformis. A kind of Palm. 
Tamala. Phyllanthus Emblica. The name Myrabolan is applied 
to the fruit which with that of another tree makes a tonic called 
Tregala Churan. 
TlLAKA. Commonly called Tila. A tree with beautiful flowers 
similar to the Sesamum plant. 
Timida. The Sesamum plant. 
Timira. An aquatic plant. 
Timisha or Tinisha. A kind of pumpkin or water-melon. Also 
a climber with purple flowers. 
Tinduka. Diospyros Glutinosa or Diospyros Embryopteris. A 
sort of Ebony. 
Tindura. Persimmon. 
Tunga. Rotderia Tinctoria. Coconut. 
U 
Uddala or Uddalaka. The plant Cordia Myxa or Latifolia also 
Paspalum Frumentaceum. Uddalaka — pushpa — bhanjika or 
the " Breaking of Uddalaka flowers " is a sort of game played 
by people in the eastern districts. 
Ushiras. Spikenard or a grass a small Saccharum. Also the 
fragrant root Andropogan Muricatus. 
Utpala. Any water-lily, the blue lotus and also the plant Costus 
Spedosum. 
Vanira. Calamus Rotang. A Reed. 
Vandhira. Memisa Sirissa. 
Vanjula. Hibiscus Mutabilis. 
Varana. Craetova Tapia. A sacred medicinal Tree. 
Vasanta Kusuma. Cordia Myxa or Latifolia. " Having blossoms 
in Spring". 
Vasanta Duta. Gaetnera Racemosa. A creeper. Also a trumpet 
flower. 
Vasanta Dru. A Mango. 
Vata. A species of Banian. 
Vetra. An ornamental Palm. 
Vettas. The Rattan Cane. 
Vibhita or Vibhitaka. The Tree « Terrninalia Belerica.' 
Vijaka. The Citron Tree. 
53* 
GLOSSARY 
W 
WEAPONS 
Agneya. The Fire Weapon. 
Aindra. Indra's Weapon. 
Aishika. An Arrow. 
Alakshya, A Weapon that cannot be followed in its course. 
Ankusha. A Goad. 
Ardea. The Web (See Shuska). 
Armani. The Thunderbolt. 
Avanagmukha. Weapon with a bent or curved head. 
Avasana. The Weapon of Protection. 
B 
Bhindipala. A short Dart or Arrow thrown from the hand or 
shot through a tube. Also an iron Spear or Dart or a stone 
fastened to a string. 
Bibhitaka. A Weapon that breaks through, pierces or penetrates. 
Brahma-Pasha. Net or noose of Brahma (Pasha meaning a rope). 
Brahmashira. Brahma-headed, probably four-headed. 
Bushundi. A kind of Mace. 
Danda or Dunda. Lit. : Staff. As a Weapon, the Rod of Punish ment. ("Dundadhara" being the title of the God of Death, who 
bears the "Rod of Chastisement.") 
Darana. A Weapon that tears or splits asunder. 
Darpana. The Drying-up Weapon. 
Dashaksha. The Ten-eyed Weapon. 
Dasha-Shirsha. The Ten-headed Weapon. 
Dhana. The Weapon of Wealth. 
Dhakya. The Rice Weapon. 
Dharma Discus or Dharma Pala. The Noose of the God of 
Justice. 
Dharma-Nabha. The Weapon of sacred navel. 
53» 
GLOSSARY 
Dharma-Pasha. The Weapon that has the power of entangling 
the Foe. 
Dhrishta. The active Weapon. 
Dhsiti. The Weapon of forbearance. 
Disc of Dharma. The Disc of Virtue. 
Disc of Kala. The Disc of Time in the form of death. 
Ditya. The Titan. 
Drirnabha. The Weapon of firm navel. 
Dunda-Nabha. The Dunda-navelled. 
Gandhakva. The Weapon of the Gandharvas. 
Hala. A Weapon shaped like a plough-share. 
Haya-Shira. The Horse-headed Weapon. 
Ishika. The ardent Weapon. 
Jyotishma. The luminous Weapon. 
Kamaruchi. A Weapon that is bright and able to go where it will. 
Kamarupa. A Weapon able to assume any form at will. 
Kakdarpa. A Weapon creating sex desire. 
Kankana. A Weapon protecting the side, possibly a kind of 
armour. 
Kapala. A Helmet. 
Karavira. The Weapon of the valiant hand. 
Karnis. Arrows with two sides resembling ears. 
539 
GLOSSARY 
Kasha. A Whip. 
Koumodaki. A Weapon giving joy to the earth. 
Krouncha or Krauncha. A Weapon named after the bird of 
that name. 
Kshapani. An oar or net. Something that destroys the destroyer. 
Kshura. An arrow with a razor-like edge. 
Kshurapra. A Crescent-shaped arrow. 
Kuntala. A Sickle-shaped Weapon. 
Kuta. A Poniard. 
Rutamudgara. A concealed Weapon, similar to a Hammer. 
Lakshya. A Weapon that can be followed in its course. 
Lohtta Mukhi. The Bloody-mouthed Weapon. 
M 
Maha-Nabha. The Large-navelled Weapon. 
Maha Vahu. The Great-armed or handed Weapon. 
Mali. The Chain Weapon. That which holds or binds. 
Manava. The Weapon of Manu, 
Mathana. The Weapon that inflicts injury and suffering. 
Mayaohara. The Great Deception or Illusion. 
Modana. The Weapon of Inebriation. 
Moha. The Weapon that causes loss of Consciousness. 
Mohan. The Weapon of attraction. 
Mushala or MOUSHALA. A Club. 
N 
Nalika. An Iron Arrow or Dart ; also a Pike or Javelin. 
Nandana. The Joy-producing Weapon. 
Naracha. An Iron Arrow. 
Narayana. Lit. : " Residing in water ". 
Nirashya. The Discourager. 
Nishkali. The Peaceful. 
Nishtrinsha. A Sword, Scimitar or Falchion more than thirty 
fingers in lengt. 
Nivata Ravacha. Impenetrable Armour. 
O 
54° 
GLOSSARY 
Paisha Astra. The Ghostly Weapon, belonging to the Pisachas, 
ghosts or demons. 
Paramo Dara Astra. The Supreme Gearing Weapon. 
Parasava. An Axe or Hatchet. 
Parigha. An Iron Bludgeon or Iron-studded Club. 
Pashopati. The Weapon sacred to Shiva. 
Path. A kind of Sword. 
Pinaka. The Bow sacred to Shiva. 
Pitsiya. The Weapon of the Pittris (Ancestors). 
Prama Thaka. The Churner. 
Prasha. A Bearded Dart. 
Prashahana. The Weapon of Destruction. 
Prashwaprana. A Weapon dealing with the vital airs. 
FratihardARA. That which neutralizes the effects of other 
weapons. 
Purang Mukha. A Weapon that has its face averted. 
R 
Rabhasa. The Desolator. 
Rati. The Weapon of Enjoyment. 
Ruchira. The Approving Weapon. 
Rubra. The Weapon sacred to Rudra (Shiva). 
S 
Sala. An Arrow with short leads. 
Samvartta. The Covering Weapon. 
Sandkana. The Arm Weapon. 
Santapana. The Weapon that scorches or burns up. One of 
Kamadeva's Arrows. 
Sarichimali. That which has force or power. 
Sarpa-Natha. The Weapon sacred to the Lord of Serpents. 
Satya-Astra. The Weapon of Existence. 
Satyakirti. The Justly-famed. 
Saura. The Heroic Weapon. 
Shakuna. The Vulture-shaped Weapon. 
Skankara. The Cause of Welfare. A Weapon of Shiva's. 
Sharnga. The Bow of Vishnu. 
541 
GLOSSARY 
Shatagni. Either & spiked mace or a stone set round with iron 
spikes. 
Shatavaktra. The Hundred-mouthed Weapon. 
Shatodara. The Hundred-bellied Weapon. 
Sbitesu. A sharp Arrow. 
Shoshana. A Weapon used to dry up water and counteract the 
Varshana Weapon. 
Shuchivanu. The Pure-handed Weapon. 
Shushka. The Dry Weapon. 
Siliumkha. An Arrow resembling a heron's feathers. 
Sinhadanshtra. A Weapon resembling lion's teeth. 
Somastra. The Dew Weapon. 
Soumanva. The Weapon of the controlled mind. 
Sunabhuka. The Fine-navelled Weapon. 
Swapana. To do with the act of sleeping. 
Swanabhuka. The Rich-navelled Weapon. 
Tomara. An Iron bar, crow-bar, lance or javelin. 
Trimbhaka. The Gaper. 
Twashtra. A Weapon possessing the power of Twashtra, the 
Architect of the Gods. 
Usiratna. A Scimitar. 
Varshana. The Rain-producing Weapon. 
Varuna Pasha. The Net of Varuna. 
Vatra. The Weapon caused by the Wind (Vatri— The Blower). 
Vatsadanta. A Weapon resembling a calf's teeth. 
Vayuvya. A Weapon having the power of the Wind. 
Viddana. The Weapon that rends or tears asunder. 
Vidhuta. The Strongly-vibrating Weapon. 
Vipatra. A Weapon resembling the Karavira. 
Vidya Dhara. The Weapon of the Demi-Gods. 
Vilapana. The Weapon causing wailing. 
Vimala. The Pure. 
Vinidra. The Somniferous. 
Vishnu Discus. The Discus of Vishnu. 
542 
GLOSSARY 
W 
X 
Yamiya. The Weapon of Death. 
Yogandhaka. Xhe United. 
THE 
RAMAYANA 
OF 
VALMIKI 
Translated by 
HARI PRASAD SHASTRI 
Vol. III. 
YUDDHA KANDA 
UTTARA KANDA 
SHANTI SAD AN 
29 Chepstow Villas 
LONDON, W.n 
1959 
Printed in Great Britain 
at the Burleigh Press, Lewins Mead Bristol 
CONTENTS 
Book VI— Yuddha Kanda 
CHAPTER PAGE 
1. Rama felicitates Hanuman. His Perplexities 3 
2. Sugriva consoles Rama ------- 4 
3. Hanuman describes the Strength of Lanka to Rama - 6 
4. The Army reaches the Shores of the Sea - 8 
5. Rama is afflicted when thinking of Sita - - - 15 
6. Ravana consults his Subjects ------ 16 
7. The Titans persuade Ravana to make War and remind 
him of his former Exploits - - - - - 18 
8. The boasting of Ravana's Generals 19 
9. Bibishana advises Ravana to send back Sita 21 
10. Bibishana insists that Sita should be given back to Rama 23 
11. Ravana summons his Assembly ----- 25 
12. The Discourse between Ravana and Kumbhakarna - 27 
13. Ravana tells the Story of the Nymph Punjikasthala - 30 
14. Bibishana blames the attitude of Ravana's Courtiers - 31 
15. Bibishana reproaches Indrajita for his boasting 33 
16. Ravana rebukes Bibishana who takes his departure - 34 
17. Words of the leading Monkeys regarding Bibishana - 36 
18. Rama listens to the Advice of the Monkeys about 
receiving Bibishana -------40 
19. Bibishana is brought before Rama ----- 43 
20. Ravana sends Shuka to Sugriva ----- 46 
21. Rama looses his Arrows on Sagara 48 
22. The Army crosses the Sea ------ ji 
23. Rama sees diverse Portents ------ 56 
24. Shuka describes his reception by the Monkeys to Ravana 57 
25. Ravana sends out Shuka and Sarana to spy on the 
Monkeys --------- 60 
26. Sarana tells Ravana of the principal Leaders of the 
Monkeys --------- 62 
27. Sarana continues his Deposition 65 
28. Shuka in his turn enumerates the Enemy 68 
29. Ravana sends out fresh Spies ------ 71 
30. Shardula gives an Account of his Mission to Ravana - 73 
31. Ravana deceives Sita about the Death of Rama- - 75 
32. Sita's Despair ---------78 
33. Sarama consoles Sita --------81 
34. Sarama spies on Ravana's Plans ----- 83 
CONTENTS 
CHAPTER PAGE 
35. Malyavan advises Ravana to make peace - - - 85 
36. Ravana directs Lanka's Defences 87 
37. Rama makes his Plans for the Attack 89 
38. The Ascent of Mount Suvela ------ 91 
39. Description of Lanka --------92 
40. The extraordinary Combat between Sugriva and Ravana 94 
41. Rama sends Angada to Ravana ----- 96 
42. The Titans make a Sortie ------ 102 
43. The Conflict between the Monkeys and the Titans - 104 
44. Angada's Exploit - - - - - - - - -107 
45. Rama and Lakshmana are struck down by Indrajita - no 
46. The despair of Sugriva and his Army. Bibishana re assures Him - - - - - - - -112 
47. Sita sees Rama and Lakshmana lying on the Battlefield 115 
48. Sita's Lamentations - - - - - - - -116 
49. Rama returns to consciousness and weeps over Lakshmana 119 
50. Garuda liberates Rama and Lakshmana - 121 
51. Dhumraksha goes out to fight the Monkeys - - 125 
52. Dhumraksha fights and is slain by Hanuman - - 127 
53. Vajradamshtra enters the Lists ----- 130 
54. Angada slays Vajradamshtra ------ 132 
55. Akampana goes out to fight against the Monkeys - 134 
56. Akampana is slain by Hanuman ----- 133 
57. Prahasta goes out to fight ------- 139 
58. The Death of Prahasta 141 
59. Ravana's prowess. Rama overcomes him but grants 
him his Life --------- 145 
60. The Titans rouse Kumbhakarna ----- 156 
61. The Story of Kumbhakarna ------ 162 
62. The Meeting between Kumbhakarna and Ravana - 164 
63. Kumbhakarna consoles Ravana ----- igg 
64. Mahodara's Speech - - - - - - - -170 
65. Kumbhakarna enters into combat - - - - - 172 
66. Angada reproaches the Monkeys for flying from 
Kumbhakarna _____--_ 176 
67. Kumbhakarna 's Exploits. He is slain by Rama - 178 
68. Ravana weeps for Kumbhakarna ----- 189 
69. Narantaka is slain by India ------ 191 
70. The Death of Devantaka, Trishiras, Mahodara and 
Mahaparshwa -------- 197 
71. Lakshmana slays the Titan Atikaya - 201 
72. Ravana, overcome by anxiety, makes further Plans - 208 
73. Indrajita, making himself invisible, puts the Monkey 
Army out of action ------- 209 
74. On Jambavan's Instructions, Hanuman goes to the 
Mountain of Medicinal Herbs - 214 
CONTENTS 
CHAPTER PAGE 
75. Lanka is set on fire by the Monkeys - 220 
76. The Prowess of Angada and Kumbha : Kumbha is slain 224 
77. The Fight between Nikumbha and Hanuman - - 229 
78. Maharaksha goes out to meet Rama and Lakshmana - 231 
79. Maharaksha falls under Rama's Blows - 232 
80. Indrajita sets out to fight once more - 235 
81. Indrajita's Stratagem. Sita's Apparition ... 238 
82. Hanuman rallies His Forces : Indrajita's Sacrifice - 240 
83. Lakshmana's Speech -------- 242 
84. Bibishana consoles Rama ------- 245 
85. Lakshmana goes to the Nikumbhila Grove to fight 
Indrajita --------- 246 
86. Indrajita breaks off his Sacrifice to fight with Lakshmana 249 
87. Indrajita and Bibishana denounce each other - - 251 
88. The Combat between Lakshmana and Indrajita - 253 
89. Lakshmana and Indrajita continue to fight - 255 
90. Indrajita loses his Charioteer, Chariot and Horses - 258 
91. The Death of Indrajita ------- 261 
92. Rama commends Lakshmana who is cured of His 
Wounds by the Monkey Sushena - - - - 266 
93. Ravana's Grief on hearing of his Son's Death - - 268 
94. Rama's Exploits --------- 272 
95. The Lamentations of the Titan Women - - - 275 
96. Ravana goes out to fight and encounters ill Omens - 277 
97. The Fight between Virupaksha and Sugriva : 
Virupaksha's Death ------- 28* 
98. Mahodara is slain by Sugriva ------ 283 
99. The Combat between Angada and Mahaparshwa - 285 
100. Rama and Ravana fight with magic Weapons - - 287 
101. Ravana flees from Rama ------- 290 
102. Lakshmana's miraculous Recovery ----- 294 
103. Rama and Ravana renew their Combat - - - - 297 
104. Rama arraigns Ravana and reproaches him for his 
Misdeeds --------- 301 
105. Ravana reproaches his Charioteer ----- 303 
106. The Sage Agastya instructs Rama in the Hymn to the 
Sun ---------- 305 
107. Sinister Portents appear ------- 308 
108. The Fluctuations of Combat ------ 310 
109. The Duel continues --------312 
no. The Death of Ravana 314 
in. The Lamentations of Bibishana ----- ^ 
112. The Lamentations of Ravana's Consorts - 318 
113. The Lamentations of Mandodari : Ravana's Funeral 
Rites ---- -320 
114. Bibishana is installed as King of Lanka - 328 
CONTENTS 
CHAPTER PAGE 
115. Hanuman carries Rama's Message to Sita - 339 
116. Rama sends for Sita -------- 332 
117. Rama repudiates Sita -------- 334 
118. Sita's Lamentations. She undergoes the Ordeal by Fire 336 
119. Brahma's Praise of Rama ------- 338 
120. Sita is restored to Rama ______ 341 
121. Dasaratha appears to Rama ______ 342 
122. On Rama's Request, Indra restores the Army - - 345 
123. Bibishana places the Chariot Pushpaka at Rama's 
disposal _-.___--- 346 
-24. Rama sets out for Ayodhya ------ 348 
125. Rama tells Sita of the Places over which they are passing 350 
126. Rama's Meeting with the Sage Bharadwaja - - 353 
127. Rama sends Hanuman to seek out Bharata - - - 355 
128. Hanuman tells Bharata of all that befell Rama and Sita 
during their Exile _______ 358 
129. Bharata sets out to meet Rama - 361 
130. Rama is installed as King. The Benefits that accrue 
from the Recitation and Hearing of the "Ramayana" 365 
CONTENTS 
Book VII— -Uttara Kanda 
CHAPTER PAGE 
i. The Sages pay homage to Rama ----- 375 
2. The Birth of Vishravas ------- 377 
3. Vishravas becomes the Protector of Wealth - - 379 
4. Origin of the Rakshasas and of the Boons they received 382 
5. The Story of the three Sons of Sukesha - 384 
6. Vishnu goes to the defence of the Gods - - - 387 
7. The Combat between Vishnu and the Rakshasas - 392 
8. The Combat between Vishnu and Malyavan - - 395 
9. The Birth of Dashagriva and His Brothers - - 397 
10. Concerning the Penances practised by Dashagriva and 
His Brothers --------- 401 
n. Dhanada cedes Lanka to Dashagriva - 404 
12. The Marriages of the Rakshasas ----- 407 
13. Ravana's Crimes --------- 410 
14. The Combat between Ravana and the Yakshas - - 412 
15. The Combat between Ravana and Dhanada. Ravana 
seizes Pushpaka -------- 414 
16. The Origin of Ravana's Name ----- 427 
17. The Story of Vedavati ------- 420 
18. The Gods assume a thousand Forms in fear of Ravana 423 
19. Ravana fights with Anaranya who dies prophesying the 
Rakshasa's End -------- 425 
20. Ravana's Meeting with the Sage Narada - - - 427 
21. Ravana goes to the Nether Regions to challenge Yama 430 
22. The Duel between Ravana and Yama : Brahma inter- 
venes ---------- 433 
23. Ravana's Struggle with the Sons of Varuna - - - 436 
First of the Interpolated Chapters. 1st Series. Ravana's 
Meeting with Bali ------- 439 
Second of the Interpolated Chapters. 1st Series 
Ravana challenges the Sun-god - - - _ 445 
Third of the Interpolated Chapters. 1st Series. 
Ranvana's Encounter with the King Mandhata - 446 
Fourth of the Interpolated Chapters, 1st Series 
Ravana visits the Moon Region and is given a Boon 
by Brahma --------- 449 
Fifth of the Interpolated Chapters. 1st Series. 
Ravana and the Maha-Purusha - 453 
CONTENTS 
CHAPTER PAGE 
24. Havana carries off a number of Women and is cursed 
by them -_______- 457 
25. Dashagriva allies himself to Madhu - 460 
26. Nalakuvara curses Havana ------ 463 
27. The Fight between the Gods and the Rakshasas. The 
Death of Sumali ------- 467 
28. The Duel between Ind'ra and Havana - 470 
29. Ravani takes Indra captive ______ 472 
30. Telling of the Curse pronounced by the Sage Gautama 
on Shakra --------- 475 
31. Ravana goes to the Banks of the Narmada River - 479 
32. Arjuna captures Ravana ------- 481 
33. Arjuna releases Ravana at the request of Poulastya - 486 
34. Bali hangs Ravana on his Girdle ----- 487 
35. The Story of Hanuman's Childhood - 490 
36. The Boons bestowed on the Child Hanuman and how 
he was cursed by the Ascetics - 494 
37. Homage is paid to Shri Rama ----- 499 
First of the Interpolated Chapters. 2nd Series - - 500 
Second of the Interpolated Chapters. 2nd Series - 503 
Third of the Interpolated Chapters. 2nd Series - - 505 
Fourth of the Interpolated Chapters. 2nd Series - 507 
Fifth of the Interpolated Chapters. 2nd Series - 507 
38. Rama takes leave of His Allies - - - - - 511 
39. Rama loads His Allies with Gifts ----- 513 
40. Rama takes leave of the Bears, Monkeys and Titans - 515 
41. Rama dismisses the Pushpaka Chariot - - - - 517 
42. The Felicity enjoyed by Rama and Sita - 518 
43. Rama informs Himself concerning current Rumours 
from His Friends ------- 521 
44. Rama summons His Brothers ------ 522 
45. Rama commands Lakshmana to take Sita to the 
Hermitage --------- 524 
46. Lakshmana takes Sita away ------ 525 
47. Lakshmana tells Sita she has been repudiated - - 527 
48. Lakshmana leaves Sita on the Banks of the Ganges - 529 
49. Valmiki offers Sita His Protection ----- 530 
Traditional Verses -------- 532 
50. Sumantra seeks to console Lakshmana - - - - 533 
51. Vishnu is cursed by Bhrigu ------ 535 
52. Lakshmana seeks out Rama ------ 537 
53. Rama tells Lakshmana the Story of Nriga - - - 538 
54. The End of the Story of Nriga ----- 539 
55. The Story of Nimi -------- 541 
56. The Cursing of the Nymph Urvashi - 542 
57. The End of the Story of Vasishtha and Nimi - - 544 
CONTENTS 
CHAPTER PAGE 
58. Shukra curses Yayati ------- 545 
59. Puru takes the place of His Father cursed by Shukra 547 
First of the Interpolated Chapters. 3rd Series - ~ 549 
Second of the Interpolated Chapters. 3rd Series - 550 
Third of the Interpolated Chapters. 3rd Series - - 554 
60. The Ascetics seek out Rama ------ 558 
61. The Story of Madhu - 559 
62. Shatrughna asks permission to fight Lavana - - 561 
63. The Installation of Shatrughna ----- 562 
64. Shatrughna sets out to meet Lavana - 564 
65. The Story of Saudasa who is cursed by Vasishtha - 565 
66. The Birth of Kusha and Lava 568 
67. The Story of Mandhata 569 
68. Shatrughna encounters Lavana - 571 
69. The Death of Lavana ------- 572 
70. Shatrughna establishes Himself in the City of Madhu 574 
71. Shatrughna seeks out the Sage Valmiki - 576 
72. Shatrughna returns to see Rama ----- 577 
73. The Death of a Brahmin's Son ----- 579 
74. Narada's Discourse -------- 580 
75. Rama makes a Tour of Inspection of His Kingdom - 582 
76. Shambuka is slain by Rama ------ 583 
77. The Story of Swargin - 586 
78. Shveta tells His Story 588 
79. The hundred Sons of Ikshvaku ----- 589 
80. Danda insults Aruja -------- 591 
81. The destruction of Danda's Kingdom - 592 
82. Rama takes leave of Agastya ------ 593 
83. Bharata persuades Rama not to perform the Rajasuya 
Sacrifice --------- 595 
84. The Story of Vritra -- 596 
85. The Death of Vritra 597 
86. Indra is liberated by means of the Ashvamedha Sacrifice 599 
87. The Story oflla- - - - - - - - -600 
88. Budha encounters Ila -------- 602 
89. The Birth of Pururavas ------- 604 
90. Ila regains her natural state through the Performance 
of the Ashvamedha Sacrifice ----- 605 
91. Rama gives the command for the Ashvamedha Sacrifice 
to be performed -------- 607 
92. Description of the Ashvamedha Sacrifice - - - 609 
93. Valmiki commands Kusha and Lava to recite the 
Ramayana --------- 610 
94. Kusha and Lava chant the Ramayana - - - -611 
95. Rama sends for Sita -------- 613 
96. Valmiki leads Sita before Rama ----- 615 
ri 
CONTENTS 
CHAPTER PAGE 
97. Sita descends into the Earth ------ 616 
98. Rama's Anger and Grief, Brahma appeases Him - 618 
99. The Death of the Queens ______ $1^ 
100. Rama sends Bharata to conquer the Gandharvas - 621 
101. The slaying of the Gandharvas and the conquest of 
Their Country -------- 622 
102. Rama bestows Kingdoms on Lakshmana's Sons - 623 
103. Death is sent to seek out Rama ----- 625 
104. Death delivers his Message ------ 626 
105. The Sage Durvasa comes to visit Rama - 627 
106. Rama banishes Lakshmana ------ 628 
107. Rama installs Kusha and Lava on the Throne - - 630 
108. Rama issues His last Commands ----- 631 
109. Rama's Departure for the Mahaprasthana - 633 
no. Rama ascends to Heaven with the other Beings - - 635 
in. The Supreme Virtue of the Ramayana - 636 
BOOK VI. 
YUDDHA KANDA 
CHAPTER I 
Rama felicitates Hanuman. — His Perplexities 
Hearing Hanuman's faithful narrative, Rama, full of joy, said : 
" The mission that Hanuman has carried out is of great 
significance and the most arduous in the world ; none other 
could have achieved it, even in thought ! Other than Garuda 
and Vayu, verily I know of no being able to cross the mighty 
ocean save Hanuman himself. Neither Gods, Danavas, Yakshas, 
Gandharvas, Uragas nor Rakshasas could enter Lanka which is 
protected by Ravana and, did any in his presumption enter 
it, would he return alive ? Who is able to capture that citadel 
by assault, that has been rendered inaccessible by its rampart 
of titans, but one whose courage and valour are equal to 
Hanuman's ? Hanuman has carried out this important service 
for Sugriva by manifesting a strength equal to his audacity. 
That servant to whom his master confides a difficult task and 
who acquits himself with zeal is said to be a superior man. The 
one who is ready and capable but who yet does no more than 
his sovereign exacts from him, in order to render himself 
agreeable, is called an ordinary man, but he who is well and 
able and yet does not carry out the command of his king, is 
said to be the least of men. Hanuman has fulfilled the task 
confided to him unfalteringly, to the satisfaction of Sugriva; in 
consequence, through the discovery of Vaidehi's retreat by 
this faithful messenger, the House of Raghu, the valiant 
Lakshmana and I have been saved. Yet even so my heart is 
heavy, since I am not able to requite the bearer of these good 
tidings in a fitting manner. Let me at least embrace the mag nanimous Hanuman since, in the present circumstances, this 
is all that is permitted to me ! " 
Having spoken thus, Rama, trembling with joy, clasped 
Hanuman in his arms, who, master of himself, his mission 
fulfilled, had returned. 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Then the great Scion of the House of Raghu, after reflecting 
awhile, added in the presence of Sugriva, King of the Monkeys : 
" Though the discovery of Sita has been accomplished, yet 
when I behold that vast ocean, I am plunged in despondency. 
How will the army of the monkeys be able to reach the southern 
shore, crossing over that impassable stretch of water ? Having 
received these tidings of Vaidehi, what can now be done to take 
the monkeys to the further side of the ocean ? " 
In the anguish that possessed him, the mighty Rama, scourge 
of his foes, having spoken to Hanuman, was filled with appre hension and became absorbed in thought. 
CHAPTER 2 
Sugriva consoles Rama 
Rama, the son of Dasaratha, being plunged in despair, the 
fortunate Sugriva spoke to him in consoling accents, saying : 
" Why dost thou give way to sorrow like a common man, O 
Hero ? Snake off this melancholy as do ungrateful men the 
recognition of favours accorded to them. After the tidings thou 
hast received and now that the haunt of thine enemy is known 
to thee, I see no cause for thine anxiety, O Raghava. Prudent 
and versed in the scriptures, intelligent and cultured as thou 
art, do thou as one master of himself, banish these unworthy 
fears that are the obstacles to success. We shall cross the sea 
where monstrous crocodiles abound, take Lanka by assault and 
slay thine adversary ! The pusillanimous and despondent man, 
whose mind is agitated by grief, accomplishes nothing worth 
while and rushes towards destruction. 
" In order to please thee, these monkey warriors who are brave 
and skilled are ready to enter a blazing fire ! Observing their 
martial ardour I am filled with confidence ; do thou test my 
courage by suffering me to bring back Sita to thee after having 
slain thine adversary Ravana of evil exploits. But first construct 
a bridge for us that we may approach that city of the Lord of the 
Titans. The instant we behold Lanka, built on the summit 
YUDDHA KANDA 
of Trikuta, Ravana is slain as it were, but unless a bridge is 
thrown over that formidable domain of Varuna, the sea, the 
Gods and Asuras themselves with their leaders cannot force an 
entry into Lanka. 
" When that dyke on the waters in the vicinity of Lanka is 
constructed and all the troops shall have passed over it, Ravana 
is, as it were, already defeated, so valiant are these monkey 
warriors who are able to change their form at will. 
"Enough of this faint-hearted attitude, fatal to any enterprise, 
O King. In this world, man is unbraced by sorrow ; that which 
must be done should be accomplished with resolution, it is 
assuredly expedient to act swiftly ! For this enterprise, O 
Great Sage, unite energy with virtue, for, if it be a question of 
loss or death, the great warriors, thy peers, see grief as the con sumer of their resources. Thou art the foremost of the wise 
and versed in all the scriptures ; with allies such as I am, thy 
victory is assured ! In sooth I see none in the Three Worlds 
able to withstand thee in combat when thou art armed with thy 
bow ! With the success of thine enterprise in the hands of the 
monkeys, thou canst not fail. When thou hast crossed the 
imperishable ocean thou shalt see Sita ere long. Desist from 
this melancholy that thou hast allowed to invade thee and yield 
to thy legitimate indignation, O Prince. Unadventurous 
warriors never win honour but all fear the wrathful. It is for 
the purpose of crossing the formidable ocean, the Lord of 
Rivers, that thou hast come hither with us; now with thy 
resourceful mind ponder on it. Once the ocean has been 
crossed by my forces, know victory to be certain ; verily when 
the whole army has passed over the sea, our triumph is assured ! 
" The monkeys, those courageous soldiers, who are able to 
change their form at pleasure, will crush their opponents with 
an avalanche of rocks and trees. Whatever the means employed, 
once we have crossed Varuna's domain, Ravana is as dead in 
mine eyes, O Destroyer of Thy Foes ! But of what use are all 
these words ? Thy victory is assured and the portents, which I 
perceive, fill my heart with joy." 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 3 
Hanuman describes the Strength of Lanka to Rama 
These words of Sugriva, judicious and full of good sense, 
pleased Kakutstha who said to Hanuman : — 
" By the power of mine austerities, I am well able to cross 
the ocean by throwing a bridge over it or even drying it up. 
What are the fortifications of this inaccessible Lanka ? Describe 
them fully to me, I wish to hear all about them as if I had 
myself beheld them, O Monkey. How are its gates manned ; 
what is the strength of the army ; what kind of moats surround 
it and how are the retreats of the titans constructed ? Thou 
didst explore Lanka at thy leisure when opportunity arose, now 
in the light of thine observations give me exact and complete 
information thereon." 
Thus interrogated by Rama, Hanuman, the Son of Maruta, 
the most eloquent of narrators, said : — 
" Hear, O King, I will tell thee the extent of the defences, of 
the moats and the number of troops guarding that city. I will 
describe to thee the opulence of those titans and the great 
prosperity of their capital due to Ravana's austerities ; I will 
tell thee also of the formidable ocean and the many regiments 
of infantry and the strength of the cavalry ". 
After this preamble, the foremost of monkeys began to relate 
lucidly everything he knew and said : — 
" Filled with happy people, Lanka abounds in elephants 
intoxicated with Mada juice and is swarming with chariots and 
titans. It has four immense gateways that are extremely high 
and furnished with strong doors which are closed with massive 
iron bars. Catapults, darts and stones are placed near at hand, 
capable of repelling the assaults of the enemy and the valiant 
titans have heaped in readiness, formidable spears in their 
hundreds. 
" The city is encircled by a high golden wall difficult to scale, 
lined within with precious gems, coral, emerald and pearl. 
6 
YUDDHA KANDA 
On all sides awe-inspiring moats of great splendour, filled with 
icy water, have been dug, which are deep and abounding in 
crocodiles and fishes. At the entrance to these dykes there are 
four long draw-bridges furnished with innumerable weapons 
and five great cannons are placed round about which defend 
the entries against the approach of the enemy, whose battalions 
would be flung by these engines of war into the moats on every 
side. The most important of these bastions, impossible to 
force, is of unsuperable strength and dazzling with its pillars 
and fulcrums of gold. 
" Endowed with great physical strength, O Prince, Ravana is 
avid for combat, ever on the alert and constantly reviewing his 
forces. Lanka is therefore impregnable, it is a celestial citadel 
that inspires terror. Surrounded by water, built on a mountain 
with its fourfold defences1, it is situated on the other side of 
the impassable ocean, O Rama, where no vessel can approach 
it, as it offers no harbourage anywhere. Built on the summit 
of an inaccessible rock, Lanka, where horses and elephants 
abound, resembling the City of the Gods, is extremely difficult 
to conquer. With its moats and Shataghnis, its engines of 
war of every kind, that capital of the wicked Ravana is unique. 
*' The eastern gate is defended by ten thousand men, all skilled 
warriors armed with spears, the foremost of swordsmen ; the 
southern gate is guarded by a hundred thousand warriors, 
there a whole army of seasoned fighters is assembled ; ten 
thousand troops armed with swords and shields, all accustomed 
to the wielding of weapons, defend the western gate ; the 
northern gate is protected by a million men who are mounted 
in chariots or who ride on horses ; they are the sons of distin- 
guished families. Titans to the number of hundreds and 
thousands occupy the centre of the city with one million tested 
troops in addition. 
" I have destroyed the ramparts and filled up the moats and, 
having torn down the walls, have set fire to the town, therefore, 
if we can find some means of crossing Varuna's domain, the 
city is ours ; let the monkeys deliberate on the matter. 
" Angada, Dvivida, Mainda, Jambavan, Panasa, Nala and the 
General Nila will fall upon Ravana's capital with its hills, 
1 See glossary under fourfold . . . 
7 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
woods, moats, archways and ramparts and bring Sita back to 
thee, O Raghava, what need is there of the rest of the monkeys ? 
Come, give the command quickly to the whole army of these 
valiant monkeys and, at a propitious hour, let us set out ! " 
CHAPTER 4 
The Army reaches the Shores of the Sea 
Having listened to the judicious and well-reasoned speech of 
Hanuman, the illustrious Rama, a true hero, spoke saying : — 
" Now that thou hast told me everything concerning Lanka, 
that dread citadel of the terrible demons, I shall make prepara tions to destroy it without delay, this is the truth ! 
" O Sugriva, be gracious enough to order our departure ; the 
sun is in mid-heaven and has entered the constellation of victory1. 
As for Sita's abductor, he shall not escape, wherever he may go ! 
When Sita learns of my approach, her hopes will revive, as 
one who, having drunk poison and on the point of death, 
quaffs the nectar of immortality. 
" The northern planet Phalguni is in the ascendent and 
will be in conjunction with the Hasta Star to-morrow. Let 
us depart, O Sugriva, and let all the troops accompany us; 
every portent is favourable ! Having slain Ravana, I shall 
return with Sita, the daughter of Janaka. My right eye-lid is 
twitching which is an indication that victory is near and that 
my purpose will be accomplished." 
At these words, King Sugriva and Lakshmana, bowing low, 
paid obeisance to Rama, who, full of faith and versed in the 
moral law, spoke once more, saying : — 
" Let General Nila with a guard of a hundred thousand 
intrepid warriors go before the army to explore the way. He 
should lead his forces speedily by the path where fruit, roots, 
shade, fresh water and honey abound. In their wickedness, 
the demons are capable of destroying the roots and fruits and 
* Abhijit. (See Glossary.) 
g 
YUDDHA KANDA 
vitiating the water on the way. Keep them at a distance and 
be on your guard ! Let those dwellers of the woods search the 
ravines and dense thickets in the forest in order to discover 
the ambushes of the enemy. 
" Those who are weak should remain here for your task is 
formidable and demands endurance; therefore let the foremost 
of the monkeys gifted with prodigious prowess lead the vanguard, 
composed of hundreds and thousands of monkeys, resembling 
the waters of the sea. Let Gaja who is like unto a hill and the 
exceedingly powerful Gavaya and Gavaksha go ahead like 
proud bulls leading the kine. The leader of monkeys, Rishabha, 
skilled in leaping, should protect the right flank of the army 
and the fiery Gandhamadana, resembling an elephant in mustha, 
should defend the left flank. I myself, mounted on the shoulders 
of Hanuman, like Indra on Airavata, will march in the centre 
of my troops in order to encourage them. Lakshmana who 
resembles death itself, will ride on the shoulders of Angada, as 
Kuvera, the Lord of Creatures and God of Wealth on Sarva bhauma. Let the mighty Lord of the Bears, Jambavan with 
Sushena and the monkey Vegadarshin, all three, protect the 
rear of the army." 
Hearing Raghava's words, Sugriva, commander of the forces, 
gave his orders to the monkeys. Thereupon a multitude of 
monkeys, eager to right, issued from the caves and mountain 
peaks, leaping on all sides. Honoured by the King of the 
Monkeys, as also by Lakshmana, the virtuous Rama, accom panied by hundreds and thousands of monkeys resembling 
elephants, set out in a southerly direction and under Sugriva's 
command, that great army in high spirits, betraying its delight, 
escorted him. 
Guarding the flanks of the army and pressing forward, they 
ran towards the south, leaping on all sides, emitting leonine 
roars, growling and shouting, feeding on honey and delicious 
fruits, brandishing great trees and flowering shrubs. In their 
pugnacity, some lifted their fellows up and threw them down 
or climbed on each others backs vying with one another in 
turning somersaults. 
" We will slay Ravana with all his nocturnal rangers ! " 
Thus did those monkeys roar in the presence of Rama. 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Going in advance of the army, Rishabha, the valiant Nila 
and also Kumuda cleared the way with the assistance of 
innumerable monkeys. In the centre, the King Sugriva, Rama 
and Lakshmana, scourges of their foes, were surrounded by 
countless redoutable warriors. The courageous monkey, 
Shatabali, at the head of ten kotis, was, in himself, sufficient to 
protect the entire host of monkeys ! With an escort of a 
hundred kotis, Kesarin and Panasa, Gaja and Arka with their 
battalions protected the flanks of that army, whilst Sushena 
and Jambavan surrounded by a multitude of bears, having 
placed Sugriva at the head, formed the rearguard. The valiant 
General Nila, a lion among monkeys, who excelled in marching, 
constantly inspected the ranks, and Valimukha, Prajangha, 
Jambha and the monkey Rabhasa went about everywhere 
encouraging the Plavamgamas. 
Whilst those lions among monkeys advanced on every side 
proud of their strength, they beheld the great Mountain Sahya 
crowned with hundreds of trees and lakes and lovely pools 
covered with flowers. 
Under the command of Rama of searing wrath, skirting the 
precincts of cities and public highways, that vast and terrible 
army of monkeys, like the ocean tide, surged forward with a 
thunderous sound. At the side of the son of Dasaratha, those 
heroic monkeys bounded forward with agility, like swift steeds 
urged on by the spur. And those foremost of men, borne on the 
shoulders of the monkeys, appeared beautiful like the sun and 
moon, in conjunction with those two great planets, Rahu and 
Ketu, and honoured by the King of the Monkeys and 
Lakshmana, Rama accompanied by his army, proceeded towards 
the south. 
Then Lakshmana, mounted on Angada's shoulders, spoke to 
Rama who was accomplishing his design, in sweet accents, 
saying : — 
" Having regained Vaidehi and slain Ravana her abductor, 
thus fulfilling thy purpose, thou wilt return to Ayodhya, who,1 
too, will be gratified. I perceive auspicious omens in the 
heavens and on the earth, O Descendant of Raghu, indicating 
the success of thine enterprise ! A favourable wind blows 
> That is the presiding Deity of the City. 
YUDDHA KANDA 
behind the army, that is soft, health-giving and auspicious ; 
birds and beasts emit cheerful and sonorous sounds ; all the 
quarters are serene and the sun shines clearly. Ushanas, 
Bhrigu's son, too, wears an auspicious aspect for thee, and the 
pole star is unaccompanied by adverse planets, the seven 
Rishis, pure and brilliant, circumambulating it. Before us 
shines the grandsire of the high-souled Ikshvakus, the immacu late Trishanku accompanied by his priest; and the twin 
Vishakas, our racial star, gleam free from obstruction. 
" Nairrita, the ruling star of the titans, is badly aspected and 
in opposition to the rising planet Dhumaketu, presaging the 
overthrow of the titans. Those about to die, in their last hour, 
become a prey to Graha. The water of the lakes is fresh and 
tastes sweet, the woods are laden with fruit, fragrant breezes 
blow softly and the trees are flowering out of season, O Lord E 
The army of the monkeys looks splendid in its formations, 
like the Celestial Host at the destruction of Taraka. Surveying 
the whole scene, O Noble One, thou shouldst experience 
supreme delight ! " 
Thus did Saumitri speak in gay tones to his elder brother 
in order to console him and meantime the army of the monkeys 
advanced, covering the earth. The dust raised by those 
mighty bears and monkeys, furnished with nails and claws, 
enveloped the whole earth and the splendour of the sun was 
obscured. Like a mass of cloud enveloping the sky, that monkey 
army advanced in solid formation encompassing the southern 
region. As they pressed on mile on mile, crossing the rivers 
and streams against the current, they traversed many leagues 
in one stretch. Resting by lakes of pure water, passing over 
mountains covered with forests, across plains, through woods 
laden with fruit, skirting them or passing through the centre, 
they went on, covering the entire earth, and their countenances 
manifesting joy, they ran with the swiftness of the wind. 
All those monkeys were zealous in Rama's service, each 
vying with the other in high spirits, vigour and prowess. Some, 
proud of their youth and supple limbs, increased their pace, 
running with extreme speed and executing handsprings and 
some of those rangers of the woods shouted * Kila ! Kila ! ' 
lashing their tails and stamping on the earth whilst others with 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
upraised arms broke off the trees and rocks here and there or 
climbed to the summit of the mountains like true mountaineers. 
Emitting loud cries and roaring, they frequently tore down 
handfuls of creepers with their thighs. In their energy, with 
their jaws set, some juggled with rocks and trees. It was by 
hundreds and thousands and millions that these formidable 
monkeys covered the earth with their splendour ; and that great 
army of monkeys, full of energy, proceeding under Sugriva's 
orders, eager for battle and anxious to deliver Sita, did not 
linger even for an instant. 
Then Rama, seeing the Sahira and Malaya Mountains with 
their dense woodlands frequented by various kinds of wild 
animals and marvellous forests, streams and rivers, went 
towards them, and the monkeys broke down Champaka, 
Tilaka, Cuta, Praseka, Sindubaraka, Tinisha, Karavira, Ashoka, 
Karanja, Flaksha, Nyagrodha, Jambuka and Amlaka Trees, and, 
seated on those enchanting plateaus, the forest trees shaken by 
the wind covered them with flowers. 
A soft breeze, fresh and perfumed with sandal, blew while 
the bees hummed in the nectar scented woods. From this 
mountain, rich in ore, the dust raised by those monkeys 
enveloped that immense army on all sides. 
On the smiling mountain slopes, Ketaka Trees, Sinduvara, 
charming Vasanti, scented Madhavi, clumps of Jasmine, 
Shiribilva, Madhuka, Vanjula, Vankula, Ranjaka, Tilaka 
Nagavriksha, all in flower, with Cuta, Patalika, Kovidara, 
Muchulinda, Arjuna, Shimshapa, Kutaja, Hintala, Tinisha, 
Shurnakha, Nipaka, the blue Ashoka, Sarala, Ankola and 
Padmaka Trees bloomed and teemed with monkeys disporting 
themselves there. Enchanting lakes and pools, frequented by 
waterfowl, ducks and herons, were to be found on that mountain, 
which was the haunt of boars, deer, bears, hyenas, lions and 
tigers inspiring terror, and innumerable venomous snakes 
infested it. Kumudas, Utpalas and many other flowers 
embellished the lakes, and flocks of birds of various kinds sang 
on that mountain side. 
Having bathed in those waters and quenched their thirst, 
the monkeys began to disport themselves and splashing one 
another, climbing the mountain, they plucked the delicious 
YUDDHA KANDA 
fruits as fragrant as ' Amrita ' and the roots and flowers from 
the trees. Yellow as honey themselves, they, delighted, feasted 
on the combs, a ' drona ' in size, which were suspended from 
the trees, and, shaking the lovely branches and letting them 
spring back again, they tore down the creepers ; some drunk 
with nectar, dancing joyfully as they continued on their way ; 
some climbed the trees, others quenched their thirst and the 
whole earth, covered with monkeys, resembled a field of ripe com. 
Reaching the Mahendra Mountain, the long-armed Rama, 
whose eyes resembled lotus petals, climbed to the summit 
adorned with various wees and from that peak, the elder son 
of King Dasaratha beheld that vast sea with its rising waves 
full of fish and turtle. 
Having crossed the Sahya and Malaya Mountains, the army 
halted in their ranks along the shores of the sea with its thunder ing waves. Then that foremost of men, Rama, descended from 
the heights and accompanied by Lakshmana and Sugriva, 
quickly entered a lovely wood on the shores of the ocean and 
reaching that immense strand strewn with boulders, washed 
by the billowing waves, he spoke thus : — 
" O Sugriva, we have reached the abode of Varuna ; now we 
should consider the matter with which we were formerly 
preoccupied. This ocean, the Lord of Rivers, with its vast 
expanse, is impossible to cross unless some special course be 
adopted. Let us camp here therefore and deliberate on the 
means by which we can transport the army to the further 
shore." 
Speaking thus, that long-armed hero, who had been rendered 
desolate by Sita's abduction, approached the sea and issued 
orders for the troops quartering. 
" Let the whole army pitch their camp on the shore, O Lion 
among Monkeys ! The time has come to take counsel and 
devise some way to cross the main ; let every leader remain with 
his forces and, under no pretext whatever, shall he leave them ; 
meantime they should find out if any ambush has been laid 
by the enemy." 
At Rama's command, Sugriva, assisted by Lakshmana, caused 
his forces to camp on the shore which was covered with trees 
and the monkey host looked resplendent like a second ocean 
13 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
whose waves were yellow as honey. Reaching that wooded 
shore those lions of monkeys encamped, eager to reach the 
further side of the ocean; and the tumult caused by those forces 
pitching their tents could be heard above the roaring of the sea. 
That vast army of monkeys, commanded by Sugriva, ranged 
in three divisions, were deeply concerned with the accomplish ment of Rama's mission and, from the shore where they were 
stationed, the monkey host gazed with delight on the vast ocean 
lashed by the tempest. Then those leaders of monkeys surveyed 
that abode of Varuna of limitless expanse, whose distant shore 
was inhabited by titans. Rendered formidable by the ferocity 
of its sharks and crocodiles, that ocean, with its foaming waves 
at the close of day and the approach of night, appeared to laugh 
and dance. When the moon rose, whose image was reflected 
limitlessly in its bosom, the ocean surged, swarming with 
gigantic sharks, whales and great fish, strong like the tempest, 
and it was fathomless, abounding in serpents of flaming coils 
and many aquatic animals and reefs. In that ocean, difficult 
to cross, whose ways were impassable, haunted by titans, the 
waves, in which sharks and sea monsters swarmed, rose and 
fell joyfully, whipped into motion by the breeze. 
Emitting sparks and turbulent with its gleaming reptiles, the 
ocean, that dread refuge of the enemies of the Gods, the eternal 
region of hell, resembled the sky and there seemed no difference 
between them. The waters simulated the firmament and the 
firmament the waters, both manifesting the same appearance 
with the stars above and the pearls below with which they were 
filled and, one with its racing clouds and the other with its 
squadrons of waves, caused the sea and sky to look identical. 
As wave clashed against wave without pause, the King of 
Rivers emitted a terrific clamour like the sound of the beating 
of great gongs in the sky. With its murmuring waves, its 
innumerable pearls and its monsters as it were pursuing it like 
a pack of hounds, the ocean, in the grip of a hurricane, seemed 
to leap excitedly. 
And the magnanimous monkeys surveyed that ocean lashed 
by the winds and the waves which, whipped by its blast, seemed 
to groan. Struck with astonishment, those monkeys regarded 
the sea with its dashing waves, rolling on and on. 
14 
YUDDHA KANDA 
CHAPTER 5 
Rama is afflicted when thinking of Sita 
On the northern shore, the army under the command of Nila 
halted and the two generals, Mainda and Dvivida, foremost 
among the monkeys, patrolled up and down and on all sides in 
order to protect the monkey host. 
The army being thus encamped on the shores of the Lord 
of the Waters, Rama, observing Lakshmana standing at his side, 
said to him : — 
" Sorrow invariably decreases with the passing of time but 
in the absence of my beloved, mine increases daily ! Not that 
my sufferings are caused by separation from my companion 
nor my misfortune by her abduction, what I deplore is that her 
youth is slipping away. O Breeze, speed to that place where 
my beloved is and, having caressed her, touch me, thus causing 
me the same delight that a weary traveller experiences when 
gazing on the moon ! That which consumes my limbs as though 
I had swallowed poison, is the cry of my dear one, while being 
borne away, * Help, O Thou who art my defender ! ' With 
my separation from her as the coals and my thoughts of her as 
the shimmering flames, the fire of my love consumes my body 
day and night ! 
" O Lakshmana, remain here while I plunge into the sea ere I 
sleep, so that the fire of my distress shall cease from tormenting 
me. It is enough that she and I sleep on the same earth. As 
dry land draws nourishment for its vegetation from marshy 
ground, so do I exist in the knowledge that Sita still lives ! 
O When shall I, having overcome mine enemies, behold her 
of graceful limbs, whose eyes resemble lotus petals, the equal 
of Shri herself ? When, gently raising her lotus-like face with 
its ravishing lips and teeth, shall I drink in her glances, as a sick 
man the nectar of immortality ? When will that playful maiden 
embrace me, her round and quivering breasts like unto Tala 
15 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
fruits pressed against my body, like sovereignty united with 
prosperity? 
" Alas ! Though I am her support, that dark-eyed princess, 
who has fallen among the titans, resembles an orphan ! How can 
it be that the daughter of Janaka, my beloved, is now in the 
midst of titans, she, the daughter-in-law of Dasaratha ? 
"When I have put those demons to flight, Sita will live anew 
as the autumnal moon shines forth again when the clouds are 
scattered. By nature slender, Sita, on account of grief, fasting 
and circumstance, is now a shadow of her former self. 
" When, with my shafts piercing the breast of that King of 
Titans, shall I empty my heart of sorrow ? When shall I 
behold the virtuous Sita, resembling a daughter of the Gods, 
her arms encircling my neck, shedding tears of joy ? When, 
like a soiled garment, shall I discard the pain born of my 
separation from Maithili ? " 
As the sagacious Rama was thus lamenting, the day declined 
and the disc of the sun, diminishing slowly, disappeared below 
the horizon. Thereupon Rama, whom Lakshmana sought to 
console, his mind still engaged in the thought of Sita, whose 
eyes were as large as lotus petals, distracted by grief, performed 
his evening devotions. 
CHAPTER 6 
Ravana consults his Subjects 
In the face of the terrible and awe-inspiring feat executed in 
Lanka by Hanuman who was the equal of Indra in prowess, the 
King of the Titans, discomfited, with bowed head addressed 
his subjects, saying : — 
" Lanka, hitherto inaccessible, has been laid waste by a mere 
monkey who has had converse with the daughter of Janaka, 
Sita. Overthrowing the palaces and slaying the foremost of 
the titans, he has turned the city upside down, such is Hanuman's 
achievement! What should I do now? May prosperity 
attend you ! What plan do you consider fitting for me to 
16 
YUDDHA KANDA 
adopt first ? Say what you hold to be proper for us to do and 
which will be to our advantage ! 
" The wise affirm that good counsel is the root of victory, that 
is why, O Brave Ones, I desire to consult you concerning Rama. 
*' There are three kinds of men in the world, the good, the bad 
and the mediocre. I will describe the qualities and defects of 
them all to you : — 
" He, who in his deliberations consults experienced counsellors, 
his friends with whom he shares common interests, his relatives 
and his superiors and then pursues his design with energy 
and the help of God, is considered to be the foremost of men. 
" He, who enters into deliberation and pursues his duty by 
himself single-handedly, accomplishing that which should be 
accomplished, is considered a mediocre man. 
" He, who fails to weigh the advantages and disadvantages of a 
matter and refuses God's aid, merely saying * I shall do it ', 
disregards his duty and is considered the least of men 1 
" Just as there are always those who are superior, those who 
are mediocre and those who are inferior among men, so there 
exists also good, bad and indifferent counsel. 
" That judgement which is given after a clear-sighted examina tion of the question and to which, re-inforced by scriptural 
authority, the counsellors agree, is considered excellent. 
"Those deliberations, where unanimity is finally reached after 
innumerable discussions, are considered mediocre, and those in 
which each person continues to stand by his own opinion and 
opposes those of others and where no conclusion can be reached, 
are considered pernicious. Therefore an undertaking that 
follows on wise deliberation will succeed. 
" You, who are all eminently sagacious, must decide what 
should be done and I will subscribe to it. Rama, surrounded 
by thousands of heroic monkeys, is advancing on Lanka to 
exterminate us. Undoubtedly Raghava will cross the ocean with 
ease by virtue of his natural powers and be followed by his 
younger brother and the monkey host. He is able to dry up 
the sea through his valour or he may use some other means (to 
bridge the ocean). In view of Rama's attack on you with those 
monkeys, do you devise some plan to protect the city and the 
army 1 " 
»7 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 7 
The Titans persuade Ravana to make War and remind him of 
his former Exploits 
Hearing the words of Ravana, their lord and master, all those 
powerful titans, in their ignorance, instilled him with contempt 
for the enemy and with joined palms, offered him ill-considered 
advice, saying : — 
" O King, we possess a vast army furnished with maces, 
spears, swords, lances, harpoons and barbed darts, why art 
thou apprehensive ? Didst thou not enter Bhogavati, having 
overcome the Serpent Race in war ? Didst thou not subdue 
Dhanada, who inhabited the summit of Mt Kailasha, surrounded 
as he was by Yakshas, creating a terrible carnage amongst them ? 
Though he regarded himself as the Lord of Men and prided 
himself on his friendship with Mahadeva, in thy wrath thou 
didst vanquish him on the field of battle. 
*' O Foremost among the Titans, Maya, the Lord of the Danavas 
in fear gave his daughter to thee in wedlock and thou didst 
also subjugate the powerful and arrogant giant, Madhu, the joy 
of Kumbhinasi! Descending into the nether regions thou 
didst defeat the Serpents Vasuki, Takshaka, Shankha and 
Jati despite their irresistible power, courage and the boons 
conferred on them, O Lord ! After fighting for a whole year, 
confident though they were in their own strength, thou didst 
force them to submit to thy yoke and learnt the science of 
magic from them, O King of the Titans, Vanquisher of thyFoes! 
" O Great Hero, the valiant sons of Varuna were defeated by 
thee in the open field as also the fourfold army attending on 
them, and thou didst descend into the vast ocean, that dark 
region, whose sceptre is the aquatic world, his crown the Shalmali 
Tree, bis noose the great billows, his serpents the attendants 
of Yama, who is irresistible in his feverish and fearful motion 
and thou didst win a glorious victory there, overcoming Death 
and rilling all thy subjects with joy. 
18 
YUDDHA KANDA 
The earth was peopled with innumerable and valiant warriors, 
equal to Indra in prowess, resembling giant trees, yet thou 
didst destroy those invincible heroes ! Raghava is neither 
their equal in courage, virtue nor in might ! Yet do thou 
remain here, O Great King, why fatigue thyself? Indra jita is 
able to exterminate those monkeys single-handed. That prince, 
O Great Sovereign, returning from a sacrifice to Maheshwara, 
who is surpassed by none, received a boon from him not easily 
obtainable in this world and, approaching that divine sea, 
whose fish are lances and spears, which abounds in weapons 
for its trees, whose turtles are the elephants and whose frogs 
are the teeming horses, whose cetaceans are the Adityas and 
Maruts, its great serpents the Vasus, its waters the chariots, 
steeds and elephants, the sandy banks its infantry, that vast 
ocean of the Celestial Hosts, Indrajita approached, in order to 
bear away their king and bring him to Lanka. Thereafter that 
Monarch was liberated by the command of the Grandsire of the 
World and the Vanquisher1 of Shambara and Vritra returned to 
his abode where all the Gods paid homage to him. 
" Therefore let thy son, Indrajita, go forth and destroy the 
army of the monkeys and Rama also, O King ; it is not worthy 
of thee to imagine harm can come from common persons, such 
thoughts should not even enter thy mind for assuredly thou 
shalt bring about Rama's end ! " 
CHAPTER 8 
The boasting of Havana's Generals 
Then the heroic general, the Titan Prahasta, who resembled 
a dark cloud, joined his palms together and expressed himself 
thus:— 
** We are able to overcome the Devas, Danavas, Gandharvas, 
Fisachas, Patagas and Uragas in the open field, how much more 
those two mortals ! 
" Under the influence of liquor and trusting in our own strength, 
we suffered ourselves to be deceived by Hanuman but as long as 
1 Indra, King of the Goda. 
19 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
I live, that ranger of the woods will not enter here again 
alive, I shall sweep the land surrounded by the sea clean of 
monkeys together with its hills, forests and jungles ; thou hast 
but to issue the command ! I shall rid thee of that monkey, 
O Ranger of the Night and thou shalt not have to suffer on 
account of thine offence.1" 
Thereafter Durmukha, in his turn, spoke in measured tones, 
saying :— 
" Assuredly we shall not tolerate this outrage that he has 
committed against us all. The devastation of the city and the 
palaces and the insult offered to our sovereign by this monkey 
shall be avenged by me. Setting out alone, I shall exterminate 
those monkeys, whether they have taken refuge in the dreadful 
deep, in heaven or in hell ! " 
Then the powerful Vajradamshtra, in a transport of rage, 
began to speak, brandishing a huge mace stained with flesh and 
blood, and said : — 
** What is that puny and miserable monkey, Hanuman, to us 
as long as the mighty Rama, Sugriva and Lakshmana exist? 
This very day, I shall return, having slain Rama, Sugriva and 
Lakshmana single-handed with the blows of my mace and 
routed that army of monkeys, or, if it pleaseth thee, hear this 
further plan of mine ; he, who is resourceful, may easily over come his adversaries. 
" Thousands of titans, able to change their shape at will, 
courageous, invincible, of terrifying aspect, are devoted to thee. 
Let them, assuming human form, present themselves before 
Kakutstha, foremost of the Raghus, and, full of confidence, 
say to him : — 
" ' We are here on behalf of Bharata, thy younger brother ', 
whereupon Rama, summoning his forces will instantly come 
hither ; then armed with lances, picks and maces, carrying bows, 
arrows and swords in our hands, we will set out with speed from 
here and meet him. Thereafter, stationed in battalions in the 
air, we will exterminate that army of monkeys under a hail of 
rocks and shafts and send them to the region of Yama. Should 
they fall into the trap, it will prove disastrous for them and Rama 
and Lakshmana will inevitably lose their lives." 
> The abduction of Sita. 
YUDDHA KANDA 
Then the son of Kumbhakarna, the valiant and powerful 
Nikumbha, in the height of anger, said in the presence of 
Ravana, the destroyer of the worlds : — 
" Let all of you remain here with our great king ; by myself 
I shall slay Raghava, Lakshmana, Sugriva and also Hanuman 
and all the monkeys." 
Thereafter in his turn, a titan named Vajrabanu, as tall as a 
mountain, who, in his wrath, was licking his lips, took up the 
tale, saying : — 
" Free from all anxiety, occupy yourselves with those things 
which afford you entertainment, single-handed I shall consume 
the entire monkey host. Remain here at ease and drink wine1; 
alone I shall slay Sugriva, Lakshmana and also Hanuman, 
Angada and all the monkeys." 
CHAPTER 9 
Bibishana advises Ravana to send back Sita 
The Generals Rabhasa, the mighty Suryashatru, Saptaghna, 
Yajnakopa and Mahaparshwa, Mahodeva, the irrespressible 
Agnikctu and the Titan Rashiketu, the lusty Indrashatu, son of 
Ravana, also Prahasta, Vimpaksha and the exceedingly powerful 
Vajradamshtra, Dhumraksha, Nikumbha and the Titan 
Durmukha, brandishing maces, harpoons, lances, darts, spears, 
axes, bows furnished with arrows and swords shining like a 
great expanse of water, all of whom were blazing with anger 
addressed Ravana saying : — 
" To-day we shall slay Rama, Sugriva and Lakshmana as 
also that wretch Hanuman who laid Lanka waste ! ** 
Then Bibishana, restraining those who had seized hold of their 
weapons, persuaded them to be seated and spoke thus with 
joined palms :— 
" My Dear Brother, the wise affirm that when the end which 
is sought cannot be attained by the three means1, the conditions 
1 Varuni — See Glossary. 
1 Conciliation, gift and sowing dissension. 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
when force should be employed are determined by the tacticians. 
O Friend, deeds of valour which have been tested according to 
prescribed injunctions, succeed against those who are careless 
when attacked, or who are in opposition to the divine power. 
Now, Rama is on his guard, he is eager for victory, he is upheld 
by divine power, he has subdued his passions and is invincible, 
yet you seek to defeat him. 
" When Hanuman crossed the ocean, that formidable Lord of 
Streams and Rivers, who could have conceived or even imagined 
the path he would take ? Our adversary has immense resources 
and troops at his disposal O Rangers of the Night, you should 
in no way disregard him ! What wrong has the illustrious 
Rama ever done to the King of the Titans that he should go to 
Janasthana and bear away the consort of that great One ? 
" If Khara, who had trespassed into a region that was not his 
own, was slain in combat by Rama, is it not legitimate for every one to defend his life ? It is on account of Vaidehi's abduction 
that we are in this great peril and we should therefore yield her 
up. What advantage is there in continuing the quarrel ? Nay, 
it is not proper to enter into hostilities with that powerful and 
virtuous prince, who would never initiate warfare without a 
definite cause. Therefore do you give back Maithili to him ere 
he, by means of his arrows, destroys this city abounding in 
wealth of every kind with its horses and elephants ! Before 
that formidable and mighty monkey host attack this, our Lanka, 
do you give back Sita. Lanka with all her heroic titans will 
perish unless the beloved consort of Rama is voluntarily 
returned to him. 
"I adjure you by the blood that unites us to follow my counsel, 
which is salutory. Return Maithili to Rama ere he looses his 
shafts for your destruction, which are freshly sharpened, steely, 
infallible, plumed and bright as the autumnal sun. Give back 
Maithili to the son of Dasaratha without delay ; renounce a 
resentment which destroys all felicity and virtue and pursue 
righteousness which increases well-being and glory. Be 
pacified, that we may live in tranquillity with our sons and 
kinsfolk. Give back Maithili to Dasaratha's son ! " 
Thus spoke Bibishana, and Ravana, the Lord of the Titans, 
dismissing them all, entered his private apartments. 
YVDDHA KASDA 
CHAPTER 10 
Bibishana insists that Sita should be given back to Rama 
As the day dawned, Bibishana, renowned for his exploits, fixed 
in the knowledge of what was just and profitable, entered the 
palace of the King of the Titans which resembled a mass of 
crags like unto the peak of a mountain. That vast area was the 
resort of the great ; well ordered and divided, it was inhabited 
by learned persons and guarded by loyal and vigilant titans on 
all sides. Re-echoing to the sound of the wind blended with 
the trumpeting of intoxicated elephants, the blare of conches 
and the blasts of trumpets, groups of lovely girls filled the alleys 
with their chattering. Its gates were of pure gold enriched 
by magnificent decorations resembling the abode of the Gan dharvas or the mansions of the Maruts, and it contained heaps of 
gems like unto the Serpents1 dwellings. 
Then that One of exceeding energy and renown entered the 
palace of his elder brother, as the sun of sparkling rays enters 
a cloud, and he heard the blessings invoked on his brother for 
his victory uttered in a loud voice by those versed in the Veda. 
And he beheld those priests instructed in the science of 
* Mantras * and the Veda, worshipped with vessels of curds, 
clarified butter, flowers and hulled rice. Thereafter the mighty armed Bibishana, duly honoured by the titans, observed the 
younger brother of the Bestower of Riches*, who was seated there. 
Approaching the throne that was covered with gold, 
embellished by the person of the king, he paid homage, extending 
fitting courtesies to him and took the seat indicated by Ravana's 
glance. Thereafter he addressed the mighty Dashagriva in the 
presence of his ministers alone and, standing before him, with 
soothing speech sought to pacify him, manifesting his knowledge 
of time and place, and expressed himself thus : — 
" O Subduer of thy Foes, ever since Vaidehi was brought 
here, inauspicious omens have been observed ! The sacrificial 
fire emits sparks and its brightness is dimmed by smoke; 
1 Serpents, the Nagas or the Serpent Race. 
1 The Bestower of Riches, the God Kuvera, brother of Havana. 
23 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
impure vapours arise therefrom even after the oblations have 
been poured to the accompaniment of sacred formulas nor does 
it burn in a proper manner. In the kitchens, sacred pavilions 
and the halls, where the Vedas are recited, reptiles are to be 
found and ants are discovered in the sacrificial offerings. The 
milk of the kiiie has dried up, ichor no longer flows from the 
strongest of the elephants, horses find no satisfaction in their 
fodder and neigh incessantly, while the asses, buffalo and 
mules, their hair standing on end, shed tears, and, though 
ministered to by experts, do not behave normally, O King. 
" Fierce crows gather together from all sides, emitting harsh 
cries and are seen swarming on the roofs of the temples. 
Vultures plane mournfully over the city and at dusk, jackals 
appear howling lugubriously. Wild beasts and deer assemble 
at the gates of the city, setting up an ominous noise to the 
accompaniment of growls. These omens indicate that thy 
fault should be expiated as the Lord thinks proper by returning 
Vaidehi to Raghava. 
" If, through error or expediency, I have given cause for 
offence, thou shouldst not condemn me, O Great Monarch! 
All thy people, both male and female and thy court affirm that 
the fault is thine ! It is through fear that thy ministers dare 
not counsel thee but I feel compelled to inform thee of what I 
have seen and heard. Judge what thou considerest to be right 
and act accordingly." 
Thus spoke Bibishana in measured words to his brother, 
Ravana, Lord of the Titans, in the presence of the ministers, 
and, hearing that judicious, reasonable, moderate and logical 
speech, productive of great good for the past, present and future, 
Ravana, who had conceived a passion for Sita, answered with 
mounting anger, saying : — 
" I see no cause for fear anywhere ! Rama shall never regain 
Maithili ! Even were Lakshmana's elder brother upheld by the 
Gods with Indra at their head, how could he withstand me in 
the field ? " 
Having spoken thus, that destroyer of Celestial Hosts, 
Dashagriva, who was endowed with terrific strength and extreme 
prowess in combat, dismissed his brother Bibishana of frank 
speech. 
YUDDHA KANDA 
Chapter i i 
Ravana summons his Assembly 
That unrighteous monarch, a slave to his passion, disregarding 
his real friends, in consequence of his evil act began to suffer 
decrease. 
His lustful desire exceeding all bounds, bis thoughts con stantly occupied with Vaidehi, though the occasion for war was 
lacking, with his ministers conceived that the time for entering 
into hostilities had come. Thereupon, sallying forth, he 
ascended his mighty chariot plated with gold, encrusted with 
coral and pearl and harnessed to well-trained horses. Seated 
in that excellent car, which reverberated like thunder, 
Dashagriva, the foremost of titans drove to the place of 
assembly. 
Titans with swords, bucklers and every kind of weapon 
preceded their king on the highway, some garbed in strange 
attire covered with every kind of gem marched at his side or 
followed in his wake, and they surrounded him on all sides. 
The foremost of the car-warriors speedily precipitated them selves in his vanguard with their chariots or on great elephants 
intoxicated with Mada juice or horses which they caused to 
rear. Brandishing maces and crowbars, they held picks and 
darts in their hands. 
As Ravana approached the assembly, the sound of innumerable 
musical instruments could be heard and the blare of trumpets 
broke forth to the accompaniment of the rolling of vehicles 
whilst the great chariot of that Indra of Demons passed along 
the splendidly decorated highway. The canopy, that was held 
over his head, shone with an immaculate purity, resembling the 
king of the stars at his full, and two fans of Yaks tails with 
crystal handles and golden fringes were waved to and fro from 
left to right. All the titans having alighted, stood with joined 
palms and bowed heads in homage to their king who was seated 
in his car. 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Amidst acclamations and cries of triumph from those titans, 
that scourger of his foes made his solemn entry into the assembly 
hall that had been constructed by Vishvakarma. 
The floor was of refined gold and six hundred evil spirits 
guarded it. Into that excellent audience hall, a masterpiece of 
Vishvakarma, Ravana made his entry sparkling with magnifi cence and seated himself on a gorgeous throne wrought of 
emeralds, carpeted with skins of deer and furnished with thick 
cushions. 
Thereupon he issued his orders imperiously to exceedingly 
fleet messengers, saying : — 
" Summon the titans hither with all speed ! " thereafter 
adding, " A great blow is about to be struck by the enemy ! " 
Hearing this command, his envoys dispersed to search 
throughout Lanka, entering every house and scouring the high ways and pleasure resorts, assembling the titans without 
ceremony. Some started out in excellent chariots, some on 
swift and mettlesome horses or elephants and some on foot. 
The city was thronged with cars, elephants and horses and 
resembled the sky filled with birds. 
Then they abandoned their mounts and chariots of every kind 
in order to enter the audience chamber and they resembled lions 
penetrating into a rocky cavern. 
Having, each in turn, paid homage to the feet of the king, 
they took up their positions, some on seats, some on cushions, 
some on the ground, and gathering in that hall at his command 
they grouped themselves according to rank round their sovereign, 
the Lord of the Titans. 
They came in hundreds; ministers distinguished for their 
skill in dealing with affairs and talented sagacious counsellors 
able to view all with the eye of understanding ; warriors also in 
great numbers gathered in the hall that sparkled with gold, in 
order to prepare for the success of their campaign. 
At that moment, arriving in a magnificent chariot, its various 
parts encrusted with gold, Bibishana appeared in the assembly 
presided over by his elder brother and, announcing himself by 
name, he paid obeisance to the feet of the king, whereafter 
Shuka and Frahasta, in their turn, did homage to that monarch, 
who conferred special places upon them befitting their rank. 
36 
YUDDHA KANDA 
The titans were adorned with fine gold and every kind of 
ornament, arrayed in rich vestures, and the fragrance of aloes 
and rare sandalwood from their garlands perfumed the hall on 
every side. 
Neither harsh accents nor ill-advised utterances nor loud 
whisperings could be heard in the assembly and, their desires 
crowned, all those titans of extreme prowess fixed their eyes 
on the face of their sovereign. 
In the midst of those skilled warriors full of energy, the 
intelligent Ravana appeared resplendent in that assembly like 
unto the God with the Thunderbolt amongst the Vasus. 
Chapter i 2 
The Discourse between Ravana and Kumbhakarna 
Then Ravana, the conqueror of hostile armies, let his gaze 
wander over the assembly and addressing himself to the General 
of his forces, Prahasta, said : — 
" O General, it is for thee, who art conversant with the four 
branches of strategy, to dispose of thy forces in the way that the 
defence of the city demands."1 
Thereupon Prahasta, alert to his sovereign's behests and eager 
to carry them out, distributed the whole of his troops within and 
without the fortress and, having disposed of his entire army in 
the city's defence, he returned to his seat in front of the king 
and said : — 
" O Mighty Lord, I have stationed thy forces within and 
without the city, now accomplish that which thou hast resolved 
to do speedily and without anxiety ! " 
At these words of Prahasta's, that monarch, who aspired to 
happiness and who was devoted to the public welfare, expressed 
himself thus amidst his followers : — 
" Should duty, pleasure or self-interest endanger whatever is 
pleasant or unpleasant, whether it be in prosperity or adversity, 
1 elephants, horses or on 
27 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
gain or loss, whether useful or disadvantageous, you are bound 
to point it out. No undertaking of mine, that I have engaged 
in with you, re-inforced by the recitation of sacred formulas, 
has ever proved fruitless ! As the Maruts, the moon, the stars 
and the planets follow in Vasava's wake, so do you all follow 
me in a splendid procession assuring me of victory ! 
"In truth I intended to mobilize you all but, on account of 
Kumbhakarna being asleep, I have not pressed this matter ! 
After sleeping for six months, the foremost of those bearing 
arms, has just risen. As regards the beloved consort of Rama, 
the daughter of Janaka, I brought her here from the solitudes of 
the Dandaka Forest which is frequented by titans. That princess 
of languid pace does not wish to share my bed, though in the 
Three Worlds, I see none to compare with her. Slender waisted, with well developed hips, her countenance resembling 
the autumnal moon, she is like an image made of gold created 
by Maya.1 Her palms are rosy, her feet are delicate and well 
set, her nails coppery and, seeing her, I am overcome with desire. 
Shining like the flame of the sacrificial fire she rivals the bright ness of the sun ; her face with its arched nose is flawless and 
fair, her eyes beautiful. On beholding her I am no longer 
master of myself and become the slave of love. Torn between 
anger and delight, this passion has proved my undoing, the 
cause of ruin and the eternal source of pain and suffering. In 
anticipation of the advent of her lord, Rama, that lovely large eyed lady has solicited a year's grace of me and I have looked 
with favour on the request of that one of tender glances but, 
like unto a spent steed on the highway, I am weary of the pricks 
of passion. 
" How will those inhabitants of the woods cross the impassable 
ocean with the innumerable monsters that inhabit it and how 
can those two sons of Dasaratha traverse it ? The outcome of 
this enterprise is impossible to predict. Say what you think 
in this matter! A mere man causes no apprehension; yet 
ponder on it carefully I 
" Formerly, in the war between Gods and Titans, thanks to 
your support I was victorious and you are still ready to stand 
by me. 
1 Maya— The Artificer of the Gods. 
28 
YUDDHA KANDA 
" Having ascertained where Sita is, those two princes, preceded 
by the monkeys with Sugriva at their head, have reached the 
shores of the sea. It is not fox us to return Sita but to destroy 
the two sons of Dasaratha, therefore deliberate on this and adopt 
a judicious line of conduct. In truth, I know of none in the 
world who can overcome us, even should he cross the water 
with the monkeys ; victory is therefore indubitably mine." 
Hearing the ramblings of that bashful lover, Kumbhakarna 
flew into a transport of rage and said : — 
" On first seeing Sita, the consort of Rama, who is accom panied by Lakshmana, she who was brought here by force, thy 
mind was wholly possessed by her as the waters of the lake are 
rilled by the Yamuna. O Great King, this conduct is not 
worthy of thee ! Thou shouldst have consulted us at the outset 
of this affair. The king who acquits himself of his obligations 
punctiliously, O Ten-faced One, and whose mind is concen trated on what he is about, has not to repent later ! Those 
undertakings that are carried out carelessly and against the 
scriptural law turn out badly, like unto impure offerings poured 
into the sacrificial fire by those who are heedless. To seek to 
end where one should begin or to begin where one should 
conclude is to ignore what is proper and what is not. If an 
adversary examines the defects of one who is unrestrained, he 
soon discovers his weak points, as birds the fissures in the 
Krauncha Mountains. Thou didst make this assault without 
forethought and it is fortunate that Rama did not slay thee, as 
poisoned food the eater thereof ! Nevertheless I shall do my 
part in this campaign that thou dost contemplate launching 
against thine enemies, O Irreproachable One ! I shall destroy 
thine adversaries, O Ranger of the Night, even as India, 
Vivasvat, Pavaka, Maruta, Kuvera or Varuna themselves, I 
shall fight against them ! 
** Entering the combat with my enormous body, the size of a 
mountain and my sharp teeth, roaring the while and brandishing 
my immense mace, I shall strike terror into Furandara himself ! 
" Ere the foe can deliver a second blow, I shall drink his blood, 
therefore take comfort, for by slaying Dasaratha's son I shall 
bring thee an auspicious victory ! Having destroyed Rama as 
also Lakshmana, I shall devour all the monkey leaders ! Enjoy 
29 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
thyself therefore and drink the most excellent of wines to the 
extent of thy desire without anxiety ; do what thou judgest to 
behest! 
"When I have despatched Rama to the region of death, 
Sita will be at thy disposal for ever." 
Chapter 13 
Ravana tells the Story of the Nymph Pumikasthala 
Seeing Ravana wrought up with ire, the mighty General 
Mahaparshwa reflected a moment and, with joined palms, spoke 
thus: — 
" He who, having penetrated into a wood frequented by wild 
beasts and serpents, does not partake of the honey he finds there, 
is a fool ! 
" Who is thy master ? Thou art the master, O Scourge of Thy 
Foes ! Enjoy thyself with Vaidehi, having placed thy foot on 
the head of thy foe ! Act in the manner of a cock, O Valiant 
Prince ! Approach Sita again and again in order to enjoy her 
and pass the time in dalliance with her. Having sated thy 
passion, what is there to fear ? Whether taken unawares or no, 
thou art well able to meet every exigency ! Without support 
Kumbhakarna and Indrajita of immense energy, would be 
capable of challenging the God who bears the Thunderbolt 
armed with his mace ! 
"Bestowal of gifts, conciliation and sowing dissension in the 
ranks of the enemy are the means of subduing them, according 
to the wise, but in the present circumstances, I incline to the use 
of the fourth ! O Lord, we shall subdue thy foes by the strength 
of our arms, do not doubt it ! " 
Thus spoke Mahaparshwa and the king, thanking him, 
replied thus : — 
" O Mahaparshwa, I will answer thee by recounting a strange 
adventure that befell me a long time ago. 
" While she was going to worship the Grandsire of the World, 
I came upon the nymph, Punjikasthala, hashing through the sky 
30 
YUDDHA KANDA 
like a flame. I stripped her of her attire in order to deflower 
her, after which like a faded lotus she reached the abode of 
Swyambhu. The magnanimous Ordainer of the World, 
learning of the matter, addressed me in anger, saying : — 
" ' O Ravana, from to-day, if thou dost violence to any other 
woman, thy head will be split into a hundred pieces, this is 
certain! ' 
"This curse alarmed me and it is for this reason that I have not 
forced Sita, the Princess of Videha, to ascend the nuptual couch. 
My fury is like unto the sea and my speed resembles the wind 
but the son of Dasaratha is unaware of it and it is on this account 
he has set out to fight me. Who would seek to waken a lion 
lying asleep in a hidden mountain den whose anger resembles 
the God of Death himself ? 
" Ramachandra has not seen my arrows in combat that resemble 
snakes with forked tongues, wherefore he is considering 
marching against me. From my bow, loosing my shafts that 
are like unto lightning on him from a myriad sides, I shall 
speedily consume Rama, as a forest is set on fire by flaming 
brands. I shall wipe out his army with mine, as the rising sun 
blots out the light of the stars. Neither Vasava of a thousand 
eyes nor Varuna can withstand me in battle ! It was by the 
strength of mine arms that I conquered the city defended by 
Kuvera ! " 
Chapter 14 
Bibishana blames the Attitude of Ravana' 's Courtiers 
Prince Bibishana listened to the boasting of Ravana and the 
thundering of Kumbhakarna and addressed the king in words 
that were profitable and sagacious, saying : — 
" O King, why hast thou brought that great serpent in the 
form of Sita hither, her breasts its coils, her anxieties its poison, 
her laughter its sharp fangs, her five fingers its five hoods ? 
While Lanka is yet not assailed by those monkeys, armed with 
their teeth and nails, who are as high as hills, give back Maithili 
to the son of Dasaratha ! 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
"Neither Kumbhakarna nor Indrajita, O King, neither 
Mahaparshwa nor Mahodara neither Nikumbha nor Kumbha 
nor yet Atikaya are able to withstand Rama on the field of battle ! 
Thou wouldst never escape from Rama alive even wert thou 
protected by Savitar or the Maruts or if thou didst take refuge 
in the region of Yama or plunge into the lowest hell ! " 
Thus spoke Bibishana and Prahasta answered him saying : — 
" We do not know what it is to fear the Gods or titans whoever 
they may be, nor do we stand in awe of Yakshas, Gandharvas 
nor great Serpents, gigantic birds nor great snakes in the field. 
Why then should we tremble to enter into combat with Rama, 
that son of a mortal king ? " 
Hearing this injudicious speech of Prahasta's, Bibishana, who 
sought to save the king and whose intellect was rooted in the 
values of virtue, profit and expediency, uttered these words full 
of good sense, saying : — 
" O Prahasta, the intrigues proposed by the King, Mahodara, 
thee and Kumbhakarna against me, born with qualities such as 
Rama possesses are as unlikely to succeed as the entry into 
heaven of one of perverse soul. It is impossible for me or thee 
or Prahasta or all the titans to slay Rama, who is supremely 
experienced. It is as if we sought to cross the sea without a 
boat ! In the presence of such a hero, essentially pious, that 
Prince of the Great Car, the issue of the Ikshvaku Race who is 
capable of any exploit, even the Gods themselves are con founded ! It is because those sharp arrows, irresistible and 
furnished with heron's plumes, that are loosed by Raghava, 
have not as yet pierced thy limbs, that thou art still able to 
boast, O Prahasta ! It is because those pointed shafts that Rama 
discharges, which quench the vital breaths and are equal to the 
lightning in their velocity, have not penetrated thy body, that 
thou dost still bluster in this wise ! Neither Ravana nor the 
exceedingly powerful Trishiras nor the son of Kumbhakarna, 
Nikumbha nor Indrajita, nor even thou thyself, are able to 
overcome the son of Dasaratha in combat, who is equal to Indra 
himself. Neither Devantaka nor Narantaka, neither Akampana, 
the magnanimous Atiratha nor Atikaya are capable of resisting 
Raghava in battle. 
" You, the friends of this monarch who is dominated by passion, 
32 
YUDDHA KANDA 
violent by nature and whose acts are thoughtless, flatter him, as 
though you were his foes, to the destruction of the titans ! 
Rescue and deliver that king who is held fast in the illimitable 
coils of a serpent possessed of a thousand hoods and who is 
formidable and of exceeding energy. It is for the sovereign's 
friends, whose desires have been gratified by him, to save him, 
even were it by dragging him by the hair of his head, like one 
who has fallen a prey to fiends of immeasurable power. It is 
for you unitedly to rescue that monarch from the surging waters 
of the ocean Rama, he who is sinking into the mouth of the 
Kakutstha hell ! 
" I will here repeat those words that are to the advantage of 
the city, the titans, the king and the host of courtiers ! I repeat 
them loyally and candidly ' Let Maithili be given back to that 
Prince! ' 
" He who, having estimated the strength of his foes, his own 
resources, the situation and the loss and gain of his undertaking 
and, after mature reflection, expresses himself frankly and 
judiciously to his master, is a true counsellor." 
Chapter 15 
Bibishana reproaches Indrajita for his boasting 
This speech of Bibishana's, who was equal to Brihaspati in 
wisdom, displeased the great Indrajita, Leader of the Nairrita 
Hosts, who replied to him thus : — 
** What do these idle words fraught with fear signify, O 
Youngest of my Uncles ? None other, even were he the issue 
of another race than our own, would speak thus or even conceive 
such thoughts ! Valour, courage, endurance, steadfastness, 
audacity and strength are lacking in Bibishana alone, the 
youngest brother of my sire. 
" Who are, in fact, these two sons of a king of men? One of 
us single-handed, were he the least of the titans, would suffice 
to exterminate them both ! O Coward, from whence springs 
thy fear ? Was I not able to cast the Protector of the Three 
33 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Worlds to the ground, the Lord of the Devas himself? Struck 
with terror, the Hosts of the Gods scattered in all directions and 
the loudly trumpeting Airavata was brought down by me, whose 
tusks I rooted out, dispersing the celestial armies by my valour. 
I who humbled the pride of the Gods themselves and afflicted 
the Daityas, am I in mine immeasurable energy not able to 
subdue these two princes, insignificant mortals as they are ? " 
At this speech of that invincible and powerful rival of Indra, 
Bibishana the foremost of warriors answered him in words 
fraught with good sense, saying : — 
" My Child, thy reflections are worthless ! Thou art young 
and thine intellect is not yet ripe ; further, to our ruin, thou art 
incapable of ascertaining what is expedient and inexpedient. 
"Under the guise of a son, O Indrajita, thou art in truth a 
hidden foe to Ravana and, hearing him prate of slaying Raghava, 
thou dost support him. Thou dost merit death, as also he who 
had the grievous idea of bringing thee here this day and intro ducing a youthful, rash and arrogant warrior into an assembly of 
counsellors ! O Indrajita, thou art thoughtless, imprudent, 
feeble of intellect, thy mind ruined by folly and extreme frivolity 
and thou speakest thus from childishness. Who can withstand 
the shock of those shining arrows which Raghava looses in 
combat resembling the Rod of Brahma, like unto fate or the 
Sceptre of Yama? Do thou give back Sita to Rama with 
treasure, pearls, rich ornaments, celestial attire and gems, so 
that we may dwell here without anxiety, O King." 
Chapter 16 
Ravana rebukes Bibishana who takes his Departure 
Bibishana, having uttered these words that were reasoned and 
full of good sense, Ravana replied in harsh accents, saying : — 
" It were better to live as a declared enemy or with a venomous 
serpent than to dwell with one who, under the guise of a friend, 
is in league with the foe. The disposition of relatives who ever 
rejoice in others' misfortunes is well known, O Titan. Kinsfolk 
34 
YUDDHA KANDA 
ever seek to bring down the one who is endowed with authority, 
energy, learning and loyalty and, should he be a hero, he is the 
more condemned by them. Constantly finding delight in the 
discomfiture of one another, their bows ready to strike each 
other down, their hearts full of deceit, they are both formidable 
and dangerous. 
" Those verses formerly recited by the elephants in the Padma 
Forest, on seeing men with snares in their hands, are well known ; 
I will repeat them to thee : — * Neither fire nor weapons nor 
traps strike terror into us but those of our own kind who are 
cruel and self-interested, it is they whom we fear ! They alone, 
undoubtedly divulge the means of making us captive ! * 
" Of all perils, those that spring from relatives are the worst, 
this is known to us. From cows we have milk, from relatives 
malice, from women capriciousness, from brahmins asceticism. 
That I am held in honour by my subjects and have been called 
to rule over an empire by descent and have set my foot on the 
heads of mine enemies, will certainly not have found favour 
with thee ! As drops of water are unable to remain on the lotus 
leaves, so does friendship slip from the hold of worthless persons. 
As in autumn the thunderclouds, which empty themselves, fail 
to saturate the earth, so does friendship fail with the vicious. As 
bees fly away after they have sucked out the honey they have 
found, so do the unworthy relinquish a friendship after it has 
served their purpose. As the honey stealer in its greed, feeding 
on the Kusha Flowers, does not exhaust their nectar neither do 
the wicked savour friendship to the full. 
" If any other had addressed such a speech to me, O Ranger 
of the Night, he would have ceased to breathe at that very 
instant ! As for thee, a curse upon thee, O Obloquy of thy 
Race!" 
At this affront, Bibishana, who ever spoke what was true, 
rose up mace in hand with four other titans and, filled with 
indignation, that fortunate one, standing in space, said to his 
brother, the King of the Titans : — 
*' Thou hast lost thy reason, O King, but say what thou wilt, 
an elder brother is the equal of a father and must be reverenced 
even if he leave the path of equity ; nevertheless I am unable to 
tolerate these outrageous utterances of thine ! Words of wisdom 
35 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
that are dictated by a desire for the welfare of others, O Ten necked One, are not acceptable to those who are not masters of 
themselves and have fallen under the sway of death ! Those 
who make flattering speeches are easy to find but rare are they 
who utter salutory though unpleasmg words or those who will 
listen to them ! I could not brook seeing thee caught in the 
noose of death, who bears away all beings, neither did I desire 
to see thee pierced by the sharp and golden arrows of Rama 
resembling naming torches. Even stout-hearted persons full of 
skill and courage fall in combat and are carried away like walls 
of sand if death overcomes them. Thou shouldst accept this 
counsel on account of its import for thine own good ! By every 
means defend thyself as well as this city and the titans ! In 
thine own interest I sought to restrain thee but my words have 
not found favour with thee, O Ranger of the Night. Fare-thee well, I go ; thou wilt be happier without me ! At the point of 
death, those whose life has run its course do not listen to the 
advice of their friends 1 " 
Chapter 17 
Words of the leading Monkeys regarding Bibishana 
Having spoken thus severely to Ravana, Bibishana went away 
and almost immediately reached the place where Rama and 
Lakshmana were. 
Resembling the peak of Mount Meru, like a flash of lightning 
in the sky, he was seen by the leaders of the monkeys who were 
stationed on the ground. 
Accompanied by four titans of renowned courage, furnished 
with armour and arrows, adorned with marvellous jewels, he 
resembled a mass of cloud, the equal of the God who wields the 
Thunderbolt and that hero was bearing excellent weapons and 
was covered with celestial gems. 
Beholding him with his four companions, Sugriva, the 
sagacious King of the Monkeys, who was invincible, standing 
amidst his forces became thoughtful and, after reflecting a 
3« 
YUDDHA KANDA 
moment, addressed the monkeys with Hanuman and others 
anxiously, saying : — 
" Without doubt, this titan, armed with weapons and 
accompanied by four of his kind, is coming to slay us ! " 
Hearing these words of Sugriva, all the leading monkeys 
brandishing great trees and rocks, said to him : — 
" Do thou speedily order us to slay these evil doers, O King ! 
Let us strike these weaklings down so that they fall on the earth ! " 
As they were speaking thus, Bibishana, who was master of 
himself, had reached the northern shore and halting there, that 
highly intelligent and powerful titan, who was fully self subdued, on perceiving Sugriva and the monkeys, said aloud 
to them : — 
" Ravana is the name of a wicked titan and their lord, and I am 
his younger brother, my name is Bibishana. It is Ravana who, 
having killed Jatayu, carried off Sita from Janasthana. That 
unfortunate one is held captive against her will amidst the female 
titans who guard her jealously. I have tried to persuade them 
by diverse arguments, continually repeated, to return Sita to 
Rama but Ravana impelled by fate will not listen to my sage 
advice. Reviled by him and treated like a slave, I, abandoning 
my consort and my son, have come to take refuge with Rama. 
Do thou inform the high-souled Raghava, that magnanimous 
protector of the worlds, that I, Bibishana, have come hither." 
At these words, the swift-footed Sugriva, full of indignation, 
ran to find Rama and, in the presence of Lakshmana, said to 
him: — 
" Having belonged to Ravana's forces, here is an adversary 
taking us unawares, who without warning has come hither to slay 
us at the first opportunity, like an owl destroying crows ! Thou 
knowest all concerning the plans, organization, distribution of 
troops and the secret service of the monkeys, as also of thy foes, 
O Thou who art their scourge ! May good betide Thee ! 
These titans, who are able to change their forms at will, conceal 
their designs ; they are bold and inventive in strategy, assuredly 
one may not trust them ! 
" This must be an emissary of the Lord of the Titans who, 
undoubtedly has come to sow dissension amongst us or to dis cover our weak points ; having first gained our confidence by 
d 37 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
craft, he himself intends to attack us one day. Assistance that 
is provided by a friend or an inhabitant of the woods like our selves or by a compatriot or a servant, may be accepted but one 
should eschew that offered by a foe, O Lord ! This deserter 
who has come to us is a titan by nature and the brother of thine 
adversary, how can we trust him on first sight ? He is Bibishana, 
the younger brother of Ravana and he has come with four titans 
to ask for thy protection. Nay, it is Ravana who has sent this 
Bibishana ; it is essential that thou satisfy thyself regarding him, 
O Thou, the most circumspect of persons ! This titan of 
deceitful soul has come hither for the purpose of treacherously 
striking thee down when thou dost least expect it, O Irreproach able Hero ! Let him and his confederates die in extreme 
torture, this brother of the wicked Ravana ! " 
Having given vent to his fury in the presence of the eloquent 
Rama, the King of the Monkeys, a skilled orator, became silent ! 
Hearing Sugriva's words, the mighty Rama said to the 
monkeys headed by Hanuman who stood near : — 
" You have heard for yourselves what your Sovereign has 
expressed in judicious words of deep significance regarding 
the younger brother of Ravana ; in times of crisis one should 
always receive the counsel of one who desires the welfare of his 
friends, and who is intelligent and prudent." 
Thus addressed by Rama, all those monkeys, ardently desiring 
his success, hastened to express their opinion, saying : — 
"Nothing is unknown to thee in the Three Worlds, O 
Raghava ; it is in deference to us that thou dost consult us as 
friends ! Thou art loyal, brave, pious, established in heroism 
and dost act only after thou hast considered the matter in accord 
with tradition with full confidence in thy friends. Let all the 
intelligent and experienced ministers debate this matter 
thoroughly, each in his turn." 
Thus spoke those monkeys and first the sagacious Angada 
suggested to Raghava that he should enquire into Bibishana's 
intentions, saying : — 
" One should sound a deserter who presents himself in every 
way. It would not befit us to put full trust in Bibishana at once. 
It is in concealing their real nature that these perfidious beings 
act, and further they attack unexpectedly, which would prove 
3* 
YUDDHA KANDA 
fatal to us. Examine him to discover what is right or wrong 
before taking any decision and, if it prove to our advantage, form 
an alliance with him ; if to our disadvantage, reject it. If it be 
fraught with danger, then renounce it, but if it should bring us 
real benefit, let us give him a fitting welcome 1 " 
Thereafter Sharabha, having reflected awhile, gave his 
opinion, revealing his motives, saying : — 
" Without delay, O lion among Men, send out a spy and, 
having by means of a wary agent, undertaken a thorough 
investigation, deal with him in a suitable manner." 
Then Jambavan, inspired by his knowledge of the scriptures 
and his own experience, expressed himself in irreproachable 
and lucid terms saying : — 
" Bibishana has come to us from a declared enemy, the wicked 
Lord of the Titans, and he has arrived here without any regard 
for time and place ; let us be on our guard against him ! " 
In his turn, Mainda, skilled in the matter of truth and error, 
a fluent speaker, uttered these prudent words : — 
" Bibishana is the younger brother of Ravana, let us interro gate him gently and progressively, O King of Kings ! When 
thou hast informed thyself of his feelings, then act according to 
whether his intentions are honest or no, O Prince of Men ! " 
Thereafter, Hanuman, the foremost of beings versed in the 
scriptures, spoke in sweet accents in words fraught with integrity, 
saying:— 
" Even Bibishana himself cannot excel thee who art of an 
exalted intellect and the foremost of those skilled in speech. It 
is not from a desire to speak nor out of emulation nor a sense of 
superiority nor from a love of debate that I open my mouth, O 
my Lord Rama, but on account of the importance of the matter 
in hand. That which thy counsellors have said seems to me 
erroneous and the real question does not lie there. If one does 
not interrogate this titan, it is impossible to discover why he 
has come hither but to make use of him has its disadvantages 
also. Concerning the sending out of a spy to make investigations 
as thy minister advises, I regard it as unwise nor will it succeed. 
It has been said that Bibishana had no regard for time and place 
when he came hither, I reserve my judgment here ; it appears 
to me that the time and place are appropriate, his fault or merit 
39 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
consists in leaving one for another. Knowing the wickedness 
of Ravana and thy true value, Bibishana has, by his arrival, 
shown his tact and intelligence. Further it was said, O Prince, 
' Let emissaries in disguise question him * and this speech 
suggested several thoughts to me. He who is suddenly in terrogated, if he be wise, becomes cautious and refuses to speak ; 
the most amiable of those, who come as friends, will change 
after such an useless enquiry. It is not possible, O King, to 
discover the character of a stranger immediately but only after 
frequent conversations when words may escape him that will 
betray any perfidy. The speech of this titan does not indicate 
an evil nature and further he has an open countenance and I have 
no doubts concerning him. He is in no way embarrassed and is 
master of himself, he does not appear to be a knave. His 
language is not that of a perverse being and I do not fed any 
suspicion regarding him. Inevitably people's real nature is 
only gradually revealed. When an undertaking is suited to the 
time and place, O Most experienced of Men, and it is a practical 
proposition, it will meet with speedy success. Bibishana is 
aware of thy magnanimity and also of Ravana's baseness. He 
has heard of the slaying of Bali and the crowning of Sugriva 
and what is more he has a desire to rule the kingdom ! If this 
is what has determined him to come hither and these are 
apparently his motives, then this is what his alliance is worth to 
us. I have said what I had to say to prove the upright character 
of this titan ; thou hast listened to me and the rest depends on 
thee, O Prince of the Wise." 
Chapter 18 
Rama listens to the Advice of the Monkeys about receiving Bibishana 
Hearing the words of the Wind-god's son, the invincible Rama, 
versed in the scriptures, answered him and, expressing his own 
conclusions, said : — 
" I also have reflected on Bibishana and wish to make the result 
known to thee, O Thou who art established in virtue 1 I shall 
40 
YUDDHA KANDA 
never refuse to receive one who presents himself as a friend, even 
were I mistaken no honest man could reproach me for 
it." 
At these words, Sugriva, that lion among monkeys, reflecting 
carefully, replied in more reasonable words and in eloquent 
terms addressed Rama, saying : — 
" What matters it if this ranger of the night be well or ill intentioned, if in time of peril he abandons his brother, whom will 
he not betray subsequently ? " 
At these words of the King of the Monkeys, Kakutstha looked 
round on that company and, smiling gently, said to Lakshmana, 
distinguished for his saintly characteristics : — 
" He who has not studied the scriptures nor possessed 
reverence for authority could not utter such words as have been 
expressed by the Lord of Monkeys ! There is however some thing peculiar in these circumstances, it seems to me, which is 
particularly to be seen in monarchs. Kings have two avowed 
enemies, their kinsmen and their neighbours, who turn against 
them in times of adversity ; this is what brings this titan here ! 
" Relatives who are not of a perverse nature, honour those of 
their own family who have treated them well but in the case of 
kings even a virtuous relative is suspect ! As to the fault that 
you point out which consists in accepting the assistance of a foe, 
I will tell you what the scriptures say on this, hear me ! 
" We are not related to the titans and it is not our kingdom 
that he covets. It is certain his compatriots are informed about 
Bibishana's departure and for this reason we should receive 
him. They will have assembled with joy and without anxiety and 
thereafter the cry * This one or that is afraid *, will have created 
a division amongst them; this is what has brought about 
Bibishana's arrival here. 
" All brothers, O Dear One, do not resemble Bharata nor all 
sons what I was to my sire nor do all friends resemble each 
other." 
Thus spoke Rama, and Sugriva rising, as also Lakshmana, 
bowed low and thereafter that exceedingly sagacious monkey 
said: — 
" Know that it is Ravana who has sent out this ranger of the 
night ! I regard it as imperative that we should make an end 
4i 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
of him, O Thou, the most circumspect of persons ! This demon 
under the order of a perverse creature has come hither to make 
an assault on thee, myself and Lafcshmana, when we are un prepared for it, O Irreproachable Warrior. He merits death, 
this Bibishana, brother of that inhuman Ravana, as well as his 
accomplices." 
Having spoken thus to the eloquent prince of the House of 
Raghu, Sugriva, the leader of the army, a fluent speaker became 
silent and Rama, having listened to Sugriva, that lion among 
monkeys, reflected awhile and then addressed that foremost of 
monkeys in measured terms, saying : — 
" Whether this titan be ill-intentioned or no, what does it 
matter, he cannot do me the least mischief. On earth, Pisachas, 
Danavas and Yakshas, as also the titans can be slain by me with 
the tip of my finger, if I so desire it, O King of the Monkeys. 
" It is related how a pigeon with whom his adversary had taken 
refuge entertained him and invited him to partake of his own 
flesh, even though he was the ravisher of his mate. Such was 
the hospitality offered by a pigeon ; what should therefore a man 
like myself not do ? Hearken to these verses, pre-eminently 
sacred, sung aforetimes by the son of Kanva, that great ascetic 
of truthful speech, Kandu : — 
"'A miscreant who approaches with joined palms, seeking 
refuge, should not in the name of humanity be slain even if he be 
a foe, O Parantapa ! The unfortunate or the fearful who plead 
for shelter or throw themselves on the mercy of their enemy, 
should be protected by him who is master of himself. If, 
conforming to the tradition, one does not render assistance 
according to one's capacity, either for reasons of fear, delusion 
or anger, one is reproached by all and the suppliant, who perishes 
before the eyes of the one of whom he has sought help in vain, 
carries away all his merit ! * 
"Therefore it is a heinous crime not to give shelter to those 
who petition it on this earth; it is to deprive oneself of heaven 
and glory and to lose one's strength and prowess ! Consequently 
I shall follow the excellent counsel of Kandu, which is pious, 
honourable and leads to heaven as the fruit of merit. Any 
being who has sought refuge with me, saying — ' I am thine * 
is assured of my protection, I swear it ! Bring this stranger 
YUDDHA KANDA 
to me, 0 Monkey, I shall offer him security whether he be 
Bibishana or Ravana himself! " 
Thus did Rama speak and Sugriva, the King of the Monkeys, 
answered that son of Kakutstha, whom he held in deep affection, 
thus : — 
" What wonder is it that thou who art loyal, virtuous and 
established in righteousness, thou who shinest like a jewel in 
the head of kings, shouldst speak thus ? I, also, in my heart, 
am convinced of Bibishana's integrity. Deduction, feeling, 
everything has been used to probe this matter thoroughly; 
let him be admitted immediately amongst us on equal terms, O 
Raghava ! Let Bibishana, who is full of wisdom, join our 
alliance ! " 
At these words of Sugriva, the King of the Monkeys, Rama 
immediately joined Bibishana as Purandara the King of the 
Birds. 
Chapter 19 
Bibishana is brought before Rama 
Raghava having accorded him protection, the younger brother 
of Ravana, the highly intelligent Bibishana bowed to him, 
looking down on the earth. 
Thereafter he descended joyously from the sky to the ground 
with his faithful companions and that virtuous one ran towards 
Rama and, falling at his feet with the four titans, addressed him 
in words full of loyalty and discretion, fitting the occasion : — 
" I am Ravana's younger brother and I have been greatly 
affronted by him. I have therefore come to seek refuge with 
thee, the protector of all beings ! Abandoning Lanka, friends 
and possessions, I place my kingdom, life and happiness at thy 
disposal ! " 
At these words, Rama, in soothing tones, while seeming to 
consume him with his gaze, said : — 
" O Bibishana, tell me truly what is the strength and weakness 
of the titans?" 
43 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Thus questioned by Rama of imperishable exploits, that titan 
described the might and extent of Ravana's power, saying : — 
" By virtue of a special boon conferred on him by Swyambhu, 
Dashagriva is invulnerable to all beings, Gandharvas, Serpents 
and Birds, O Prince. I have also another brother older than 
myself, the valiant Kumbhakarna, the illustrious rival of India 
in war. 
" 0 Rama, Ravana has Prahasta commanding his forces, who 
is perhaps known to thee. It is he who vanquished Manibhadra 
in combat on Mount Kailasha ! When clad in armour that no 
arrow can pierce, furnished with his archer's gloves, Indrajita, 
taking up his bow, makes himself invisible, and on the battle field, having propitiated the God of Fire, that fortunate one sows 
carnage amongst the foe, O Raghava. Mahodara, Mahaparshwa 
and the Titan Akampana, who are his lieutenants, resemble the 
Lokapalas on the field of battle. 
" Ten thousand kotis of titans, able to change their form at 
will, feeding on flesh and blood, inhabit Lanka. At their head, 
their sovereign the wicked Ravana made war on the supporters 
of the earth as also the Gods who were all overcome by him." 
Having listened to Bibishana and weighed his words carefully, 
Rama expressed himself thus : — 
" These exploits of Ravana's that thou hast faithfully described 
are well known to me ; I shall slay Dashagriva as also Prahasta 
and his sons ; thereafter I shall install thee as king ; believe me, 
this is the truth ! Were he to plunge into the region of Rasatala 
or even Patala or take refuge with the Grandsire of the World, 
he would not escape alive ! Before I have annihilated Ravana 
with his sons, his kinsfolk and his allies in battle, I shall not 
return to Ayodhya, I swear it by my three brothers ! " 
Thus did Rama of imperishable exploits speak and the 
venerable Bibishana bowing unto him, said : — 
" In the slaying of the titans and the capture of Lanka, I will 
assist thee with all my strength; I will break through the 
enemy's ranks." 
As he spoke thus, Rama embraced him and thereafter he 
commanded Lakshmana saying : — " Do thou bring water from 
the sea and anoint the sagacious Bibishana as King of the Titans 
under my direction, O Noble Brother 1 " 
44 
YUDDHA KANDA 
Thereupon Saumitri, in accord with Rama's behest, performed 
the royal anointing in the midst of the leading monkeys and 
immediately those monkeys, beholding Bibishana raised to that 
supreme rank, acclaimed that magnanimous titan, crying : 
" Excellent ! Excellent ! ". 
Meanwhile Hanuman and Sugriva enquired of Bibishana, 
saying : — 
" How shall we, with the mighty army of monkeys who 
surround us, cross the ocean, that indestructible empire of 
Varuna ? What means should we employ to traverse the refuge 
of the Lord of Streams and Rivers speedily with our troops ? " 
At this question, the virtuous Bibishana answered : — " That 
Prince, the offspring of the Race of Raghu, should approach the 
ocean that was excavated by Sagara1 and he will assuredly help 
one of his own race". 
Thus spoke Bibishana, that sagacious titan, and Sugriva 
instantly went away with Laksnmana to join Rama. 
Thereafter the thick-necked Sugriva conveyed to him this 
salutory counsel of Bibishana's to take refuge with Sagara and 
it found favour with the virtuously minded Rama. Then that 
illustrious prince repUed to Sugriva, the King of the Monkeys, 
who was accompanied by Laksnmana. Full of respect for that 
monkey, who sought to gratify him in every way, he smiled 
upon him as also on his brother Laksnmana and said : — 
" This plan of Bibishana's pleases me, O Sugriva and 
Laksnmana. Sugriva is sagacious and was ever a prudent 
counsellor : do ye both reflect on the matter and say what you 
consider to be best.'* 
Having spoken thus to them, those two warriors Sugriva and 
Lakshmana answered in respectful tones, saying : — 
" How should the counsel of Bibishana not find favour with 
us in these circumstances ? He brings us the means to success. 
Without throwing a bridge over the sea, that redoubtable 
dominion of Lanka will remain inaccessible even to the Gods 
and titans with their leaders. Let us carry out the suggestion 
of the virtuous Bibishana scrupulously ; enough time has been 
lost. Let us approach Sagara, so that with our army we may 
reach Lanka of which Ravana is the support." 
1 Sagara being one of Rama's ancestors. His story is told in Balakanda. 
45 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
At these words, Rama proceeded to the shore that was covered 
with Kusha Grass belonging to the Lord of Streams and Rivers 
as the God of Fire ascends the altar. 
Chapter 20 
Havana sends Shuka to Sugriva 
Now the titan, Shardula by name, who had gone out to recon noitre, beheld the army encamped under Sugriva's command, 
and that spy belonging to the wicked Ravana, King of the Titans, 
having inspected those troops, returned and, regaining Lanka 
with all speed, said to his sovereign : — 
" Behold a multitude of monkeys and bears, immeasurable 
and boundless as the sea, approaching Lanka. The sons of 
Dasaratha, the brothers Rama and Lakshmana, who are illus trious and endowed with beauty, have come to search for Sita. 
Having reached the shores of the sea, they have encamped there, 
O Illustrious Prince. These forces cover ten leagues in extent 
in every direction ! O Great King, it behoves thee to inform 
thyself of the true state of affairs immediately ! Let thine 
emissaries enquire into the matter speedily ; restitution, 
conciliation or sowing dissension are involved here." * 
Hearing Shardula's words, Ravana, the Lord of the Titans 
became perturbed and, reflecting on the matter, instantly gave 
orders to Shuka, the most skilled of negotiators, saying : — 
" Go and seek out Sugriva on my behalf and say to that 
prince in persuasive and ingratiating tones : — 
" Assuredly thou, the offspring of a race of great monarchs, 
the mighty son of the King of the Bears, art exceedingly 
powerful ! Thou hast nothing to fear ; thou art to me as a 
brother, O Lord of the Monkeys. If I bore away the consort 
of that crafty prince, what is it to thee ? Do thou return to 
Kishkindha; Lanka cannot be conquered by these monkeys 
by any means nor by the united efforts of the Gods with the 
Gandharvas, how much less by men or apes ? * " 
1 Tlie Three means of dealing with an enemy. 
46 
YUDDHA KANDA 
At this command of the King of the Titans, that Night ranger Shuka, rising into the air, rapidly passed through space 
and, having journeyed for some time high over the waters, 
halted and, standing in the sky, repeated all he had been told 
by the wicked Ravana to say to Sugriva. As he was still speak ing, the monkeys bounded into the air and, smiting him with 
their fists, prepared to tear him to pieces and fling him to the 
ground. 
Thus maltreated by the monkeys, Shuka spoke in this wise : — 
" One does not assault an ambassador, O Kakutstha, therefore 
send away these monkeys. He who withholds the message of 
his master and gives voice to that which he has not been author ized to utter, merits death." 
Hearing Shuka's complaints, Rama issued a command to 
those monkeys, who were assaulting that titan, saying : — " Do 
not slay him ! " and Shuka having received immunity from the 
attacks of the monkeys, steadying himself in the air with his 
wings, spoke again, saying : — 
" O Sugriva, Thou who an endowed with magnanimity, O 
Hero, who art full of energy and valour, what shall I say to thee 
on the part of Ravana, the Scourge of the World ? " 
Being thus addressed, that mighty King of the Monkeys, the 
foremost of all the apes, interrupted that Ranger of the Night, 
Shuka, and made the following proud reply, characteristic of 
his nature : — 
" Thou art not my friend nor art thou worthy of my pity, 
thou art neither my benefactor nor dost thou find favour with 
me ! Thou and thy kinsfolk are the enemies of Rama, thou 
shalt perish like Bali and thou meritest death ! I shall annihilate 
thee, thy sons, thy relatives as also Lanka to which I shall lay 
siege at the head of my great army and reduce it to ashes ! 
** Nay, thou insensate Ravana, thou shalt never esca pe Raghava 
even if thou wert protected by the Gods themselves with their 
leaders. Wert thou to make thyself invisible in the sun's path 
or enter into hell or take refuge at the lotus feet of the King of 
the Mountains,1 thou with thy followers wilt succumb to 
Rama's blows. In the Three Worlds, I see none whether be it 
Pisacha, Rakshasa, Gandharva, or Asura, who is able to 
1 Mt. Kailneha. 
47 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
protea thee ! Thou hast slain the aged King of the Vultures 
and carried off the large-eyed Sita in the presence of Rama and 
Lakshmana and, having made her captive, dost not recognize 
her for what she is ! Thou art unaware how strong, powerful 
and irresistible to the Gods themselves is this Prince of the Race 
of Raghu, who shall deprive thee of thy life." 
Thereafter the foremost of monkeys, the son of Bali, Angada, 
took up the discourse and said : — 
" O Virtuous King, this is no ambassador, he has the appear ance of a spy ; he is only here to count our forces, let him be 
arrested, do not allow him to return to Lanka. Such is my 
opinion." 
Thereupon at a sign from the king, the monkeys flung them selves on that titan, whom they seized and bound, whilst he, 
without defence, wailed loudly. 
Ill-treated by those furious monkeys, Shuka began to cry 
upon the magnanimous Rama, born of Dasaratha, saying : — 
" They are tearing out my wings ruthlessly and putting out 
my eyes, may the consequences of all the evil deeds that I have 
done since the day I was born till the night I die, fall on thee if 
I lose my life ! " 
Hearing his cries, Rama would not sanction his death and 
ordered the monkeys to release him. 
CHAPTER 2 I 
Rama looses his Arrows on Sagara 
Thereafter, spreading the Darbha Grass on the shore of the sea, 
Rama with joined palms, his face turned towards the east, made 
obeisance in honour of the ocean and laid himself down. 
That Scourge of bis Foes pillowed his head on his arms that 
resembled the coils of a serpent and were adorned with ornaments 
of gold, their habitual decoration ; those arms that formerly were 
perfumed with sandal and aloes, saffron of the hue of the dawn 
lending them lustre ; those arms on which Sita leant on the 
nuptual couch causing them to shine as do the waters of the 
48 
YUDDHA KANDA 
Ganges the body of Takshaka ; those arms, resembling the shafts 
of a chariot, that increased the distress of his foes and the delight 
of his friends, were stretched out on the shore of the sea. 
The tightening of the bow-string had rubbed the skin off the 
left arm of that skilful archer and the right, that bestower of 
thousands of kine in charity, resembled a great mace. Leaning 
on his powerful elbow, the mighty-armed Rama said : — 
" Sagara will grant me a passage or he shall be slain by me ! " 
Having thus resolved, he lay down by the ocean, restraining 
his speech and with a concentrated mind in accord with 
tradition. There, following the scriptural injunction, Rama 
lay on the ground spread with Kusha Grass and slept peacefully 
for three nights. For three nights Rama, endowed with learning 
and piety, remained beside Sagara, the Lord of the Waters. 
Nevertheless that indolent one did not appear to that hero, who 
had yet paid him honour as was his due. Thereupon, his eyes 
suffused with wrath, Raghava, enraged against him, said to 
Lakshmana, the bearer of auspicious marks, who stood near : — 
" It is from contempt that the Ocean does not appear to me 
in person ! Deference and forbearance, integrity and friendly 
speech, these qualities belonging to virtuous men are not valued 
by those who are deprived of them, who regard them as weakness, 
whereas the braggart, the dissolute and the arrogant who boast 
openly and commit every kind of excess, are overwhelmed with 
regard ! Meekness will never bring victory on this earth, O 
Lakshmana, any more than in the forefront of battle ! To-day, 
pierced by my shafts, thou shall behold aquatic monsters by 
their leaping churn up the waters where they dwell on every 
side ! See, O Lakshmana, how I shall sever the serpents* coils 
and the limbs of the great fish like unto the trunks of elephants. 
To-day I shall dry up the ocean with its multitudinous waves, 
shells, pearls, fish and monsters. Because I have manifested 
patience, the Ocean, the abode of whales, regards me as power less ! Away with forbearance to such persons ! It is on 
account of my mildness that he manifests his true nature ! 
Bring me my bow, O Saumitri and mine arrows resembling 
venomous snakes, I shall dry up the sea and the monkeys may 
then cross it on foot ! To-day, indomitable though he be, 
I shall yet overthrow Sagara with my shafts ; he who is bounded 
49 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
by the shore and who is filled with a myriad waves ! I shall 
wipe out that Ocean, the Abode of Varuna, that is inhabited by 
great giants." 
Speaking thus, bow in hand, his eyes dilated with anger, 
Rama appeared exceedingly terrible, like unto the Fire at the 
end of the world cycle. Grasping his formidable bow with its 
barbed and fearful shafts more firmly, he caused the earth 
to tremble as does Shatakraru with his thunderbolts. His 
flaming and impetuous arrows, unrivalled in power, penetrated 
the waters of the sea and struck terror in the serpents. And 
those waves of the sea with their sharks and monsters, were 
extremely agitated, so that with the roaring of the wind, a 
formidable clamour arose. In a trice, the ocean became a mass 
of clashing waves, throwing up spray, shells and fragments of 
mother of pearl, and panic spread among the Pannagas of 
flaming jaws and brassy eyes and amidst the mighty Danavas 
in their abode, the depths of hell. Waves in their millions as 
high as the Vindhya and Mandara Mountains rose from that 
Lord of Waters with his crocodiles and great fish and the Ocean 
emitted a loud roaring, amidst the breaking billows, with the 
terrified serpents, demons and great crocodiles in flight. 
Then Saumitri rushed towards Rama, who, in his burning 
ardour, was stretching bis incomparable bow with loud 
mutterings, crying: — "Stay! Stay!" and thus speaking, he 
took hold of that weapon, saying : — 
" Thou hast no need to act in this wise to accomplish thine 
end and bring Sagara to subjection, O Foremost of Heroes ! 
Thy peers do not permit themselves to be overcome by anger ! 
Call to mind the forbearance of virtuous men ! " 
At that instant, the Brahmarishis and celestial Rishis, who, 
invisible, were stationed in the sky, cried out : — " Hold ! 
Hold ! do not act thus ! " 
YUjDDHA KANDA 
CHAPTER 22 
The Army crosses the Sea 
Thereafter the Prince of the Raghus addressed the Ocean in 
menacing tones, saying : — 
" To-day I shall dry up the sea with the nether regions ! O 
Sagara, with thy waters consumed by my shafts, thy denizens 
slain by my blows, a great cloud of dust will arise from thy 
drained bed and the monkeys will cross to the other shore on 
foot! 
"Thou hast sought to oppose me but art unaware of my 
valour or my strength ! O Abode of the Danavas, being full of 
pride, thou canst not foresee thy fate ! " 
Thereafter, fixing an arrow resembling the Rod of Brahma 
and placing it on his excellent bow, Raghava stretched that 
weapon, and heaven and earth seemed to be riven, as it were, 
and the mountains trembled, darkness covered the earth and 
all the regions were obscured. Tremors ran through the lakes 
and rivers ; the sun, moon and stars swerved in their course and 
though the sky was lit by the sun's rays, it was enveloped in 
darkness and blazed with a hundred meteors, whilst thunder 
reverberated with an unparalleled sound in the firmament. The 
five celestial Maruts blew and like massed legions tore up the 
trees, dispersing the clouds in the twinkling of an eye, breaking 
off the points of the rocks and shattering the mountain peaks. 
In the sky, loud thunder claps resounded with immense power 
and tumult. The invisible beings emitted cries of fear and, 
lying prostrate on the earth in their agony, shook with terror, 
convulsed and unable to move. Thereafter the Ocean with its 
mass of water, serpents and demons surged beyond its confines 
to the extent of a league, though the time of the final deluge was 
not yet at hand ; nevertheless Rama, the descendant of Raghu, 
scourge of his foes, did not retreat before the disordered heavings 
of that Lord of Rivers and Streams ! 
Sagara himself rose out of the waves, like the day's orb rising 
5* 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
over the eastern mountain, Meru, and that Ocean appeared with 
the Pannagas of naming jaws and he was of the hue of emerald, 
adorned with gold ; wreaths of pearls festooned his attire and on 
his head he bore a diadem of every kind of flower ; ornaments of 
refined gold and pearls from his domain were his decoration. 
Covered with gems and metals of every kind, resembling the 
Himavat Mountain, the waters surging round him, he was 
encircled by the clouds and winds, while the rivers Gunga and 
Sindhu were his escorts. 
Rising, the noble Sagara, escorted by the rivers with the Gunga 
and Indus at their head, approached Rama with joined palms, 
who stood arrows in hand, and, reflecting awhile the Ocean said: — 
" Earth, wind, air, water and light, O Beloved Raghava, 
remain fixed in their own nature. Neither from desire nor 
ambition nor fear, O Prince, nor from affection am I able to 
solidify my waters inhabited by sharks ; nevertheless I will make 
it possible for thee to cross over them ! This is my resolve — 
the sharks will remain inactive while the army makes its way 
across and, for the monkeys, I shall become like the earth ! " 
On this, Rama said to him : — "Hear me, O Thou who art the 
refuge of Varuna ! This arrow of mine must accomplish its 
intended end ! Where shall I let this mighty shaft fall ? " 
Hearing Rama's words and seeing that formidable missile, the 
exceedingly powerful Ocean replied : — 
" To the north of this place is a sacred region, Drumakulya, 
a name as renowned in the world as thine own ! There 
innumerable robbers of fearful aspect and deeds, having Abhiras 
as their chief, drink my waters. The vicinity of those perverse 
beings is intolerable to me ; it is there, O Rama, that thou 
shouldst loose thy shaft that never misses its target." 
Thus spoke the magnanimous Sagara and Rama, in accord 
with his wish, let fly that marvellous dart in his presence. And 
the place, where that arrow resembling a flash of lightning fell, is 
known in the world as the desert of Maru1. The earth pierced 
by that dart emitted a loud cry and from its gaping wound the 
waters of hell gushed forth. As the arrow fell, it created a 
thunderous sound and the deep crater which is known as Vrana" 
1 Mam — Malwar in Ragasthan. 
1 Vrana— The Wound. 
52 
YUDJDHA KA*NDA 
was filled with the water of the deeper springs ; it seemed as if 
the earth was riven and wells and ponds appeared there. This 
place became known as Marukantara and is famous in the Three 
Worlds. Thereafter Rama, the son of Dasaratha, having dried 
up the waters of the ocean, conferred a boon, saying : — 
" This place shall be rich in pasturage and free from disease ; 
it will abound in fruit, roots, honey, ghee and milk and be 
fragrant with aromatic herbs ; thus it will remain retaining those 
excellent qualities E " 
In this way the Desert of Mara came to possess these manifold 
features and by the grace of Rama's liberality, assumed a 
pleasant aspect. When the waters had been dried up, Samudra, 
the Lord of Streams and Rivers, said to Raghava, who was 
skilled in the use of weapons : — 
" My Friend, there stands Nala, the son of Vishvakarma, 
whose father has overwhelmed him with gifts ; he is generous 
and devoted ; great are the powers of that monkey ; let him 
construct a bridge over my waters, I will uphold it ; Nala is as 
skilled as his sire ! " 
At these words the Ocean disappeared and Nala, that prince 
of monkeys spoke to the valiant Rama thus : — 
" Resorting to the skill I have inherited from my sire, I shall 
build a bridge over the spacious and vast domain of aquatic 
monsters ; what the Ocean has said is true ! 
" When one has to do with the ungrateful, in my opinion the 
rod is the most salutory method for men ! A plague on forbear ance as also on generosity and kindness ! Assuredly Sagara, that 
formidable mass of water, in fear of punishment, wished to see 
a bridge constructed and out of fear was willing to suffer 
Raghava to pass over it. 
"My mother received a boon on the Mandara Mountain 
from Vishvakarma, who said to her : — ' A son will be born to 
thee who will resemble me, O Goddess ! ' 
"No one having questioned me, I have not spoken of my 
powers but I can assuredly construct a causeway over Varuna's 
domain ; from to-day let all the leading monkeys set to work 1 " 
At Rama's command, those lions among the monkeys entered 
the mighty forest with alacrity in hundreds and thousands on 
every side and those leaders of the simian tribes, tearing up the 
E 53 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
rocks, which in size they resembled, and the trees also dragged 
them to the sea and they covered the ocean with Sala, Ashvakarna, 
Dhava, Vamsha, Kutaja, Arjuna, Tala, Tilaka, Tinisha, 
Balalaka, Saptaparna and Karnikarna Trees in full flower, as 
also Cutas and Ashokas. Those foremost of monkeys trans ported those trees, with or without roots, bearing them like so 
many standards of Indra and they heaped Talas and piles of 
Dadina, Narikela, Bibhitaka, Kanya, Bakula and Nimba Trees 
here and there. With the aid of mechanical devices, those 
powerful colossi dug up stones as big as elephants and rocks, and 
the water suddenly spouted into the air only to fell instandy. 
Thereafter those monkeys churned up the sea by rushing into 
it on all sides or pulling on the chains. 
That immense causeway constructed by Nala in the bosom 
of the sea was built by the arms of those monkeys of formidable 
exploits and it extended over a hundred leagues. 
Some brought trunks of trees and others set them up ; it was 
by hundreds and thousands that those monkeys, like unto giants, 
made use of reeds, logs and blossoming trees to construct that 
bridge, rushing hither and thither with blocks of stone resembling 
mountains or the peaks of crags, which, flung into the sea, fell 
with a resounding crash. 
The first day those monkeys resembling elephants, of immense 
energy, full of high spirits and exceedingly merry, erected 
fourteen leagues of masonry. The second day, those highly 
active monkeys of formidable stature set up twenty leagues. 
Bestirring themselves, those giants threw twenty-one leagues of 
structure over the ocean on the third day and on the fourth, 
working feverishly, they built up twenty-two leagues in extent. 
The fifth day, those monkeys, industrious workers, reached to 
twenty-three leagues distance from the further shore. 
That fortunate and valiant son of Vishvakarma, leader of 
monkeys, constructed a causeway worthy of his sire over the 
ocean and that bridge erected by Nala over the sea, the haunt 
of whales, dazzling in its perfection and splendour, was like the 
constellation of Svati in space. 
Then the Gods, Gandharvas, Siddhas and supreme Rishis 
assembling, stood in the sky, eager to see that masterpiece and 
the Gods and Gandharvas gazed on that causeway, so difficult 
54 
YUDDHA KANDA 
of construction that was ten leagues in width and a hundred in 
length built by Nala. 
Those monkeys thereafter dived, swam and shouted at the 
sight of that unimaginable marvel that was almost inconceivable 
and caused one to tremble ! And all beings beheld that causeway 
thrown over the ocean and by hundreds and thousands of kotis, 
those monkeys, full of valour, having built that bridge over the 
immense repository of waters, reached the opposite shore. 
Vast, well-constructed, magnificent with its wonderful paved 
floor, solidly cemented, that great causeway like unto a line 
traced on the waves, resembled the parting of a woman's hair. 
Meanwhile Bibishana, mace in hand, held himself ready at 
his post with his companions in case of an enemy attack. 
Thereafter Sugriva addressed Rama, who was valiant by 
nature, saying: — 
" Mount on the shoulders of Hanuman and Lakshmana on 
those of Angada. O Hero, vast is this ocean, the abode of 
whales ; those two monkeys who freely range the sky will 
transport you both ! " 
Then the fortunate Rama and Lakshmana advanced thus and 
that magnanimous archer was accompanied by Sugriva. Some 
monkeys strode forward in the centre, some threw themselves 
into the waves, some sprang into the sky, others marched on the 
bridge, some ranged through space like birds, and the terrific 
tumult of the tramping of that formidable army of monkeys, 
drowned the roar of the ocean. 
When those simian troops had passed over the sea by the grace 
of Nala's causeway, the king ordered them to camp on the shore 
which abounded in roots, fruits and water. 
At the sight of that masterpiece that had materialized under the 
command of Raghava, despite the difficulties, the Gods, who had 
drawn near with the Siddhas and Charanas as also the great 
Rishis, anointed Rama in secret there, with water from the sea 
and said: — 
" Mayest thou be victorious over thy foes, O Thou, who art a 
God amongst men ! Do thou rule over the earth and the sea 
eternally I " 
Thus in various auspicious words did they acclaim Rama in 
the midst of the homage offered to him by the brahmins. 
55 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 23 
Rama sees diverse Portents 
The elder brother of Lakshmana beheld certain portents and 
as their significance was known to him, he embraced Saumitri 
and said : — 
" O Lakshmana, occupying this region provided with fresh 
water, and woods abounding in fruit, let us speedily divide these 
innumerable forces and form ourselves into battalions ! Great 
is the danger I foresee, boding destruction to the world and the 
slaughter of the valiant bears, monkeys and titans. 
"A dust storm is blowing up, die earth trembles and the 
peaks of the mountains shake ; trees fall, clouds resembling wild 
beasts emit a terrible roaring and let loose dreadful showers 
mingled with blood ; there is an awe-inspiring twilight, lurid 
like unto red sandalwood ; from the blazing sun, a circle of fire 
falls ; filled with terror, wild beasts and birds with harsh voices 
are raising mournful cries to the sun on every side. In the 
night, the moon, bereft of brilliance, burning with a black and 
red halo as it rises, resembles the destruction threatening the 
world. A dark stain appears on the solar disc which is 
diminished, sombre, without radiance and coppery. Behold, O 
Lakshmana, a thick dust blots out the stars and seems to 
foreshadow the end of the world ! Crows, eagles and vultures 
fall wheeling, whilst jackals inspiring the greatest terror emit 
sinister howls. Rocks, maces and spears, hurled by the monkeys 
and demons, cover the earth which has become a morass of 
flesh and blood. 
"Without delay, attended by all the monkeys, let us, this very 
day, attack this city difficult of access of which Ravana is the 
support ! " 
Thus spoke the Archer Rama, the subduer of the foe in conflict, 
and, bearing his bow and arrows, he set forth in the direction of 
56 
YUDDHA KANDA 
Thereupon all the valiant monkeys with Bibishana and Sugriva 
at their head rose up crying destruction on their powerful foe 
and the boisterous demonstration of those heroic monkeys, 
made with the object of pleasing Rama, filled that son of the 
House of Raghu with delight. 
chapter 24 
Shuka describes his Reception by tne Monkeys to Ravana 
That army of warriors in well-ordered, formations looked 
splendid with the radiance Rama conferred on it which resembled 
the full moon on a starry night, and the earth, pressed under foot 
by the energetic tread of that multitude like unto the sea, trembled 
with fear. 
Meanwhile those inhabitants of the woods heard a great 
tumult arising in Lanka and the formidable rolling of drums and 
clashing of gongs caused their hair to stand on end. This 
clamour filled the leaders of the monkeys with joy and, in their 
ardour, they emitted shouts that surpassed that uproar, and the 
cheering of the Plavamgamas, resembling the rumble of thunder 
in the skies, reached the ears of the titans. 
Seeing Lanka dressed with many coloured banners, the son of 
Dasaratha bethought himself of Sita and his heart was filled 
with grief. He reflected — ' It is there that that youthful woman, 
whose eyes resemble a gazelle's, is held captive by Ravana, like 
Rohini when she is overpowered by the red-bodied planet '*. 
Heaving long and burning sighs, that hero looked at 
Lakshmana and spoke words fitting to the occasion to him : — 
" See, O Lakshmana, this marvellous city, built by 
Vishvakarma on the summit of the mountain, set aloft so that it 
appears to lick the skies, where innumerable palaces cluster 
like unto the aerial abode of Vishnu covered with white clouds ; 
Lanka with its blossoming groves looks magnificent like 
Chaitaratha which is filled with the song of birds of every kind 
and glowing with fruit and flowers ! See how a gentle breeze 
57 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
sways the branches from which the birds dart, where bees swarm 
and where cuckoos abound." 
Thus did Rama, the son of Dasaratha address Lakshmana and 
thereafter ranging his forces according to the traditional methods, 
he issued the following commands to that army of monkeys. 
" Let the valiant and invincible Angada place his troops in the 
centre with the General Nila. Surrounded by the simian 
battalions, Rishabha should establish himself on the right wing 
of the army, and he who resembles an elephant in mustha, the 
indomitable and courageous Gandhamadana, should place 
himself at the head of the left flank. I shall go to the forefront 
of the army with Lakshmana as mine aide-de-camp and 
Jambavan, Sushena and Vegadarshin to spy out the 
land. 
" Those three high-souled ones, the leaders of the bears, should 
protect the centre of the forces and the rearguard be under the 
command of the Lord of Monkeys, as the western region is 
dominated by the sun of brilliant rays." 
The innumerable divisions being thus skilfully distributed, 
that army, led by the foremost of monkeys armed with boulders 
and huge trees, resembled the heavens with its mass of clouds ; 
and those monkeys advanced on Lanka that they were eager to 
destroy. 
" It is with the peaks of mountains that we shall demolish 
Lanka or if need be with our bare fists ! " such was the resolve 
of those powerful monkeys. 
At that instant the exceedingly valiant Rama said to Sugriva : — 
" Our forces are properly marshalled, now let Shuka be 
released ! ** 
Under the order of that Indra of Monkeys, who was full of 
energy, Havana's agent was set at liberty. Released on Rama's 
command and harassed by the monkeys, Shuka, in a frenzy of 
terror went to seek out the King of the Titans, whereupon 
Ravana with a sneer enquired of him : — 
" What is the meaning of thy fettered wings ? Why are thy 
flanks torn ? Hast thou fallen into the power of those capricious 
monkeys ? " 
Thereupon Shuka, wrought up with fear, pressed by his 
exceedingly powerful sovereign, made this reply :— 
58 
YUDDHA KANDA 
" Repairing to the northern shore of the sea in order to deliver 
thy message faithfully by employing gentle and soothing tones, 
those barbarous Plavamgamas, barely having caught sight of me, 
hurled themselves upon me and began to beat and pound me 
with their fists. It was quite impossible to enter into any form 
of mediation with them or discuss anything ; those monkeys 
are ferocious and violent by nature, O Lord of the Titans ! 
The slayer of Viradha, Kabandha and Khara, Rama, however, 
who is accompanied by Sugriva, is searching for Sita. Having 
thrown a bridge over the sea and traversed the salty waves, that 
archer, Raghava, has come hither and sets the titans at nought. 
" The bears and monkeys, gathering in thousands of divisions 
equal to mountains or clouds, cover the earth. There is no more 
possibility of an alliance between the monkeys and the titans 
than between a God and a demon ! Before they reach the 
ramparts decide quickly how thou wilt act ; either restore Sita 
to Rama or enter into conflict with him ! " 
Thus spoke Shuka and Ravana, his eyes red with anger, 
looked at him as if he would consume him with his glance and 
said: — 
" Even had I to enter into conflict with the Devas, Gandharvas 
and Danavas, I would not restore Sita, were the whole earth to 
shake ! When will my shafts fall on Raghava as the intoxicated 
bees fall on the blossoming trees in Spring ? When, with mine 
arrows, shall I consume his body flowing with blood as flaming 
torches destroy an elephant. 
" His forces will suffer eclipse before my powerful army as the 
brilliance of the stars at the rising of the sun. That son of 
Dasaratha is not aware that I possess the strength of Sagara 
and the swiftness of Manila, that is why he desires to meet me in 
combat. Rama has not yet seen the shafts resembling venomous 
serpents that repose in my quiver ; that is why he wishes to enter 
into combat with me ! That Raghava is not yet conversant 
with my great might nor with the Vina in the form of my bow 
that I pluck with mine arrows, the bow-string producing a 
formidable sound, the cries of the wounded its terrible accom paniment, the darts its innumerable notes and which, when I 
enter the river of the enemy ranks as into a vast arena, I shall 
cause to resound on the field of battle ! 
59 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
"Neither the thousand-eyed Vasava in person nor Yams of 
the fiery missiles nor Vaishravana himself is able to overcome me 
in battle ! " 
chapter 25 
Havana sends out Shuka and Sarana to spy on the Monkeys 
Rama, the son of Dasaratha, having traversed the ocean with 
his army, the boastful Ravana addressed his counsellors Shuka 
and Sarana, saying : — 
" The entire army of monkeys has crossed the impassable 
ocean on a bridge constructed by Rama, an unprecedented 
exploit ! I never deemed it possible to throw a causeway over 
the sea! 
"Introduce yourselves into their ranks without being dis covered and inform meexactlyregardingthenumber and prowess 
of those monkey leaders, the counsellors who customarily attend 
on Sugriva and Rama and the scouts and warriors among them ; 
further how the dyke was constructed over the waters of the sea ; 
how the army advances, of their plans and of the strength and 
weapons used by Rama and the courageous Lakshmana." 
At this command, the two Titans, Shuka and Sarana, assuming 
the form of monkeys, boldly entered into the simian ranks but 
they were unable to count the monkey host which was endowed 
with unimaginable energy causing the hair to stand on end and 
which amidst the caves and waterfalls spread over the summits 
of the mountains. From every side those divisions came, some 
having crossed, some crossing and some still to cross, and those 
who were arriving or had still to come, emitted loud roars and, 
to those rangers of the night, resembled the infinite sea. 
Now the illustrious Bibishana recognized Shuka and Sarana 
under their disguise and arresting them denounced them to 
Rama, saying : — 
" Here are two followers of the King of the Titans who have 
come to spy out conditions, O Conqueror of Hostile Citadels 1 ** 
60 
YUDDHA KANDA 
Terrified at the sight of Rama and despairing of their lives, 
the two demons, with joined palms, said to him in great 
fear: — 
" 0 Most Cherished Issue of the House of Raghu, we have 
been sent by Ravana to find out about the whole army ! " 
Hearing these words, Rama, the son of Dasaratha, who 
delighted in the welfare of all beings, smiling, answered them, 
saying: — 
" If you have inspected the whole army and examined their 
positions carefully and fulfilled the mission entrusted to you, 
then return in peace. But if there is anything you have not 
investigated and you still wish to see, then Bibishana will show 
it to you fully. Your arrest should not cause you any apprehen sion with regards your lives, you are envoys and, having laid 
aside your arms, have been taken captive ; you do not merit 
death! 
" O Bibishana, set these two rangers of the night free, who have 
come in disguise to spy on us with the intention of creating 
division amongst their foes. And you, when you return to the 
great Gty of Lanka, repeat my words faithfully to the King of the 
Titans, saying : — 
" ' That force on which thou didst rely when taking Sita away 
from me, employ freely with the aid of thy troops and allies. 
To-morrow at break of day, thou shalt see mine arrows demolish 
the City of Lanka with its ramparts and arches as well as the army 
of titans ! My dreadful ire will fall on thee and thy forces at 
dawn, O Ravana, as the God bearing the Thunderbolt, Vasava, 
discharges it on the Danavas!'" 
Receiving this command, the two Titans, Shuka and Sarana, 
admiring his justice, cried out : — " Mayest thou be victorious 1 " 
and paid obeisance to Rama. 
Returning to Lanka, they said to the Lord of the Titans : — 
" Bibishana took us captive with the intention of slaying us, 
O King, but Rama, he whose valour is immeasurable, seeing us, 
let us go ! 
"In that place four of the foremost monkey leaders are 
assembled who are equal to the Protector of the Worlds. Their 
warriors, skilled in the use of weapons, of proved prowess, are 
Rama the son of Dasaratha, the fortunate Lakshmana, Bibishana 
61 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
and the highly energetic Sugriva, whose strength is equal to the 
great Indra's. 
"Even without the monkeys themselves taking part, they are 
able to penetrate into this City of Lanka with its walls and arches 
and tear up the foundations and transplant them elsewhere. 
Such is Rama's capacity and such his weapons that he could 
overthrow the city single-handed, his three companions standing 
by ! Under Rama, Lakshmana and Sugriva's protection that 
army is completely invincible even against the Gods and Asuras 
combined ! Now that army of powerful and aggressive 
monkeys, dwellers in the woods, is breathing war ; it is useless 
to dispute with them. Make peace and restore Maithili to the 
son of Dasaratha ! " 
chapter 26 
Sarana tells Ravana of the principal Leaders of the Monkeys 
Hearing the sincere and courageous utterance of Sarana, the 
King Ravana, answered :— 
" Even did the Gods, Gandharvas and Danavas unitedly seek 
to attack me and were all beings to tremble, I would not restore 
Sita .; O Friend, having been roughly handled by the monkeys 
thou dost fear them and for this deemest it opportune for me to 
give up Sita ! What adversary is able to overcome me in war ? " 
Having uttered this arrogant speech, Ravana, the Lord of the 
Titans, in order to survey the horizon, proudly went up to his 
palace that was as white as snow and as high as innumerable 
palm trees. Accompanied by his ministers, Ravana, who was 
transported with anger, swept the mountains, forests and ocean 
with his glance and he beheld the entire region covered with 
Plavamgamas. 
Seeing that illimitable and invincible army of monkeys, 
Ravana enquired of Sarana, saying : — 
" Who are the leaders of these monkeys ? Who are their 
warriors ? Who their princes ? Who are those marching at 
their head in order to demonstrate their valour? Who are 
62 
YUDDHA KANDA 
Sugriva's counsellors and his generals ? Tell me all, O Sarana ! 
What is the strength of these monkeys ? " 
Sarana, thus interrogated by that Sovereign of the Titans 
being well-informed, pointed out the leaders of those dwellers 
in the woods to him. 
He said : " That monkey who stands before Lanka roaring 
amidst a hundred thousand leaders who escort him, whose 
powerful voice shatters the whole city with its walls, gates and 
arches, its rocks, forests and jungles and who is in command of 
the army of the magnanimous Sugriva, Lord of all the Deer of 
the Trees, is the valiant General NUa. 
" He who holds his arms high and who tramples the earth under 
his feet as he marches, that hero whose face is turned towards 
Lanka and who, in fury, yawns convulsively, who resembles 
the peak of a mountain in stature and the filaments of a lotus in 
hue, who, in an excess of anger, continuously lashes out with 
his tail, the swish of which is heard in the ten regions, that 
warrior whom Sugtiva, the King of the Monkeys, installed as 
heir-apparent, is named Angada and he is challenging thee to 
combat. That warrior, the equal of his sire, Bali, is beloved of 
Sugriva and as devoted to Raghava's interests as Varuna is to 
Shakra's. That Janaka's daughter has been seen by Hanuman, 
who is as swift as the wind and the servant of Raghava, is all due 
to the advice of Angada. Having formed innumerable battalions 
with the foremost of monkeys, that warrior is marching against 
thee at the head of his army in order to destroy thee. 
"Close to Bali's son and himself surrounded by a considerable 
number of troops, the valiant Nala, the builder of the bridge, 
stands ready on the battlefield. 
" Those soldiers clad in saffron colour, who are stretching their 
limbs, roaring and gnashing their teeth, are following the one 
who boasts that he will overthrow Lanka with his forces : it is 
Shveta of silver hue, who is exceedingly agile and brave ; that 
intelligent monkey, a warrior renowned in the Three Worlds 
has come to take his orders from Sugriva and will leave at once 
to place the army of monkeys in strategic positions and inspire 
enthusiasm amongst his divisions. 
*' That one who formerly ranged the Mountain Ramya, that is 
also called Samrocana on the borders of the Gaumati River and 
63 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
which is covered with trees of varying fragrance, ruled over a 
kingdom there, is the General Kumuda and that other, who 
joyfully draws in his train hundreds and thousands of warriors 
with long hair and immense tails hanging down, who are 
coppery-coloured, yellow, black, white and matted, hideous to 
look upon, is the intrepid Monkey Kanda. He yearns to fight 
and boasts that he will destroy Lanka with his forces. 
"The third, who resembles a tawny lion with a great mane 
and whose gaze is fixed attentively on the city as if he wished to 
consume it with his glances, who dwells mostly on the Mountains 
Krishna and Sahya of the Vindhya Range of pleasing aspect, is 
the General Rambha, O King. Three hundred koris of the 
most valiant of monkeys who are formidable, impetuous, burning 
with ardour surround him and follow in his steps for the purpose 
of causing the destruction of Lanka by their blows. 
"The one who is shaking his ears and yawning continuously, 
who, when facing death remains immoveable and who never 
retreats in the face of a hostile army but eyeing them askance 
foams with rage ; he who lashes out with his tail and gnashes 
his teeth, that hero of immense energy, wholly devoid of fear, 
O King, has his abode on the ravishing Mountain of the Salveyas 
and the name of that leader is Sharabha ; to him belong forty 
hundred thousand monkeys named Viharas1. 
" The one who is like unto a great cloud enveloping space and 
who, surrounded by monkey warriors, resembles Vasava amidst 
the Gods, whose voice like the roll of a drum, can be heard from 
the midst of the monkeys, who is eager to fight, dwells in 
Pariyatra, a mountain that is exceeded by none in height ; 
that general ever invincible in combat is named Panasa. That 
commander with fifty lakhs of lieutenants, each of whom leads 
his own battalion, who shines resplendent amidst the host of 
monkeys of terrifying bounds, who are encamped on the seashore 
like unto a second ocean, he who resembles Dardura2 is called 
General Vinata. In his wanderings he drinks the waters of the 
Vena, that most excellent of rivers. His army is composed of 
sixty thousand Plavamgamas and that monkey, named Krathana, 
1 Viharas — "Those who roam about at will'. 
1 Dardura — A mountain in the south, sometimes associated with Mount 
Malaya. 
YUDDHA KANDA 
challenges thee to combat. His lieutenants are full of daring 
and vigour and each commands a battalion. That monkey 
whose body is well nourished and who is of the colour of red 
ochre, who, in the pride of his strength ever holds the other 
monkeys in contempt, is the illustrious Gavaya. He is advancing 
towards thee full of fury and seventy hundred thousand warriors 
accompany him ; he also boasts that he will lay Lanka waste with 
his troops. 
"Those invincible heroes may not be numbered and the 
flower of their captains are each at the head of his own 
particular force. " 
CHAPTER 27 
Sarana continues his Deposition 
" I shall describe these valiant leaders that thou art able to 
see, who are devoted to Raghava, full of prowess and who count 
their lives as nought. That one, the hairs adhering to whose 
enormous tail are coppery, yellow, black, white and hideously 
matted and that stand on end, a tail that brilliant as the sun's 
rays brushes the earth as he advances, is the Monkey Hara. 
He is followed by hundreds and thousands of monkeys brandish ing trees, awaiting the moment to attack Lanka ; they are the 
leaders of the Monkey King and in the service of the Simian 
government. 
" Those warriors, whom thou perceivest in such incalculable 
numbers, that are no more able to be counted than the sands on 
the limitless shores of the sea and who cover the mountains, 
plains and rivers, ranged like sombre clouds, black as collyrium, 
extremely ferocious and valiant fighters, are the bears ; 
observe how they are advancing to confront thee, O King. In 
their midst, surrounded on every side by them, like Parjanya 
by storm clouds, is their sovereign of dreadful glance and 
fearful aspect ; he inhabits Rikshavat, a very high mountain 
and goes to slake his thirst at the Narmada River ; he is the lord 
of all the bears and his name is Dhumra ! He has a brother, 
65 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
younger than he, who resembles him in stature but who far 
surpasses him in valour ; behold him, Jambavan, like unto a 
mountain ! Of controlled senses, he is full of reverence for 
his spiritual superiors and implacable in combat. His intelli gence greatly assisted Shakra in the war between the Gods and 
the titans and he was the recipient of many boons. These 
giants hurl down great rocks as large as clouds from the mountain 
heights, which they have scaled, nor do they tremble in the face 
of death. Shaggy, resembling Rakshasas or Pisachas, those 
warriors of surpassing energy roam about in great numbers. 
And that commander on whom the eyes of the monkeys are 
fixed, who now leaps up in fury and then stands motionless, 
that foremost of monkeys, O King, dwells on the Sahasraksha 
Mountain, and the name of that exceedingly valiant leader is 
Rambha. 
" He who, walking on all fours touches the mountain a league 
away with his flanks, whose chest is a league in height, who is not 
surpassed by any quadruped in beauty is the renowned 
Samnadana, the Grandsire of the Monkeys. Extremely skilful, 
he formerly entered into combat with Shakra on the battlefield, 
who was unable to defeat him, such is that superior leader. 
" Another whose valour equals Indra's on the battlefield was 
born of a youthful Gandharva maiden and Krishna vartman. 
In the struggle between the Devas and Asuras he brought help 
to the Celestials. That illustrious one sits beneath the Jambhu 
tree on that mountain, the King of Peaks,1 frequented by 
Kinneras, which constantly affords delight to thy brother, O 
Lord of the Titans. It is near there that that fortunate one, that 
powerful Lord of the Monkeys, General Krathana, whose 
prowess is not confined to words and who ever eschews defeat, 
sports. He is standing surrounded by thousands of monkeys ; 
he also undertakes to crush Lanka 1 
" The one who usually roams by the Ganges, sowing terror 
among the elephants, remembering, as he does, the old quarrel 
between elephants and monkeys, that leader with a voice of 
thunder, who dwells in the mountain caves, subduing the tuskers 
in the woods and uprooting the trees, that Prince of Monkeys, 
like unto Indra himself, passes his life happily at the head of a 
1 Kailasha. 
66 
YUDDHA KANDA 
host of monkeys by the river that issues from the Himalayas or 
Ushirabija, otherwise Mandara, the highest of mountains. 
Hundreds and thousands and millions of monkeys, proud of 
their strength and agility, full of prowess and fire, roaring loudly, 
follow that indomitable warrior, their leader, named Pramathin. 
It is he, resembling a great cloud propelled by the wind, whom 
thou hast pointed out, surrounded by a furious band of intrepid 
monkeys who stir up a cloud of yellow-coloured dust which the 
wind carries in all directions. Those formidable and powerful 
black-snouted Golangulas, numbering a hundred times a hundred 
thousand, who, having assisted in the construction of the 
causeway, have gathered growling round the General of the 
Golangulas, named Gavaksha, threaten to demolish Lanka 
themselves. There where, frequented by bees, the trees yield 
fruit in every season, on that mountain encircled by the sun, the 
brightness of which it equals, the radiance of which shed on 
beast and bird, lends them the same brilliance, whose plateaus 
are never forsaken by the magnanimous and great Rishis, whose 
trees are laden with fruit possessed of every desirable savour, 
where exceedingly rare honey abounds; on that golden and 
ravishing mountain, the General Kesharin lives amidst those 
delights, O King. 
" There are sixty thousand wonderful golden mountains in the 
midst of which Savarnimeru stands out, as thou amongst the 
titans, O Ring ! It is on that mountain, that brown, white and 
copper-coloured monkeys or those yellow as honey dwell, who 
possess pointed teeth and nails and who resemble lions ; they 
are as indomitable as tigers, the equals of Vaishvanara, with 
their long coiled tails like unto serpents vomiting poison or like 
elephants intoxicated with ichor as high as great hills, and they 
roar like thunder ; their eyes are grey and round and when they 
are on the march they create an appalling uproar ; all of them 
stand looking on Lanka as if they were about to destroy it. In 
their midst is the powerful leader who ever faces the sun ; he is 
eager to conquer thee ; his name is renowned in the world, it is 
Shatabali, O King, and he swears to destroy Lanka with his 
troops. Courageous, powerful, full of daring, he prides himself 
on his personal valour. In his devotion to Rama that monkey 
will not spare his life. 
67 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
" Gaja, Gavaksha, Gavaya, Nala, Nila, all those monkeys are 
surrounded by ten kotis of fighters each, as also other leading 
monkeys impossible to count, so great is their number, agile 
inhabitants of the Vindhya Range. All, O Great King, are 
exceedingly powerful, their stature is equal to high hills and all 
are capable of levelling the earth by uprooting and razing its 
mountains to the ground." 
CHAPTER 28 
Shuka in his turn enumerates the Enemy 
Sarana having described the forces of the enemy to Havana, the 
Lord of the Titans, Shuka, in his turn, took up the tale, saying : — 
" Dost thou observe those resembling elephants intoxicated 
with ichor, rising up like banian trees on the banks of the Ganges 
or Sala Trees on the Himalayas ? 
" O King, those warriors, able to change their form at will, are 
irresistible, equal to the Daityas and Danavas and, in war, are 
endowed with the valour of the Gods. They number twenty-one 
million or more ; they are Sugriva's companions and Kishkindha 
is their accustomed abode ; those monkeys born of the Gods and 
Gandharvas are capable of assuming different shapes at will. 
" The two who stand there, who resemble each other and nave 
the appearance of Gods, are Mainda and Dvivida, none is their 
equal in combat. Sanctioned by Brahma, they have drunk the 
water of immortality and they boast that they will demolish 
Lanka by their own prowess. 
" As for that monkey whom thou seest there, resembling an 
intoxicated elephant, who in strength and fury is able to churn 
up the ocean itself, it is he who came to Lanka to find Vaidehi and 
spy on thee, O Lord. That monkey whom thou perceivest, has 
returned, he is the eldest son of Kesarin and his sire is said to 
be Vayu ; he is Hanuman, who crossed the ocean. Able to 
change his shape at will, that handsome and courageous warrior 
is no more able to be stayed in his course than Satataga1 himself. 
1 Satataga~The God of the Wind. 
YUDDHA KANDA 
"While yet a child, seeing the sun rise, he desired to eat it and, 
springing up, followed it to a distance of three thousand leagues, 
reflecting : — * I shall seize hold of Aditya and my hunger will 
be appeased forever ! ' In this thought, intoxicated with his 
own strength, he leapt into the air but was unable to reach that 
God, who is invincible even to the Celestials, Rishis and Demons, 
and he fell on the mountain where that radiant orb rises. In his 
fall he fractured his jaw slightly on a rock and on account of the 
strength of his jaw he was called Hanuman ! 
" By associating with those monkeys I was enabled to learn his 
history, yet I am quite unable to describe his prowess, beauty 
and vigour adequately. He plumes himself on being able to 
destroy Lanka single-handed ; it was he who formerly set fire to 
the city ; how is it that thou dost not remember him ? 
" Nearby is a warrior, dark of hue with eyes like lotuses, the 
Atiratha1 among the Ikshvakus ; his heroism is well known in 
the world ; his sense of duty never wavers nor does he ever 
swerve from righteousness ; he knows how to loose Brahma's 
weapon and is conversant with the Veda ; indeed he is the most 
learned of Vedic scholars ; he shatters the firmament with his 
arrows and rends the earth; his ire is equal to Mrityu's and he 
resembles Indra in valour ; his consort is Sita, whom thou didst 
bear away from Janasthana ; he is Rama, who has come to wage 
war on thee, O Ring. 
" He who stands on his right, radiant as gold refined in the 
crucible, with a broad chest, reddened eyes and dark curly 
locks, is Lakshmana, who is devoted to his brother's interests 
and fortune ; a general and a seasoned soldier, he knows better 
than any how to handle every weapon. Full of ardour, 
invincible, victorious, brave, accustomed to success and 
powerful, he has ever been Rama's right hand and his very 
life's breath. Where it concerns Raghava he would never be 
the one to seek to preserve his life. He has also sworn to 
exterminate all the titans in battle. 
" He who stands on Rama's left and who is surrounded by a 
group of titans, is Bibishana, whom that king of kings has 
installed as sovereign of Lanka ; he, filled with ire, is advancing 
in order to enter into conflict with thee ! 
1 Atiratha — Chief warrior. 
» 69 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
" The other whom thou seest standing in the centre like an 
immoveable rock, rules over the foremost of those deer of tht 
branches ; his prowess is immeasurable ; for energy, glory, 
intelligence, strength and nobility, he stands out among those 
monkeys as Himavat amongst the mountains. He dwells with 
the principal monkey leaders in Kishkindha with its groves and 
trees, an inaccessible citadel of impenetrable approaches, 
excavated from the mountains. He wears a golden chain, 
wrought with a hundred lotuses in which Lakshmi, who sym bolises prosperity, beloved of Gods and men, dwells. That 
chain, his consort Tara and the eternal empire of the monkeys, 
were conferred on Sugriva by Rama after he had slain 
Bah. 
" O King, a hundred thousand multiplied by a hundred, is 
called a koti and a hundred thousand such kotis make one 
shanku. A hundred thousand shankus make one maha shanku, a hundred thousand maha-shankus make one vrinda. 
A hundred thousand vrindas make a maha-vrinda and a hundred 
thousand mana-vrindas make a padma. A hundred thousand 
padmas make a maha-padma and a hundred thousand maha padmas make a kharva. A hundred thousand kharvas make a 
samudra and a hundred thousand samudras make an ogna. 
A hundred thousand ognas make a maha-ogna. That Lord of 
the Monkeys as also Bibishana with his counsellors are sur rounded by a hundred thousand shankus, plus a hundred 
thousand maha-vrindas, a hundred padmas, a hundred thousand 
maha-padmas, a hundred kharvas, a samudra and a maha-ogna. 
a koti of maha-ognas and a thousand samudras, and that Sugriva 
has come to make war on thee ! 
"Powerful is that army following the King of the Monkeys, 
who is ever strong and brave. In the presence of those forces 
that resemble a blazing meteor, O Great King, prepare thyself 
to vanquish the enemy and take measures to avoid defeat ! " 
YUDDHA KANDA 
CHAPTER 20. 
Ravana sends out fresh Spies 
Beholding those foremost of monkey leaders pointed out by 
Shuka — the valiant Lakshmana, Rama's right arm, his own 
brother Bibishana standing close to Raghava, the King of all 
the Monkeys, Sugriva, of exceeding prowess, the heroic Angada, 
grandson of the Bearer of the Thunderbolt, the powerful 
Hanuman and the invincible Jambavan, Sushena, Kumuda, 
Nila and Nala, those paragons among the monkeys, Gaja, 
Gavaksha, Sharabna, Mainda and Dvivtda — Ravana, his heart 
agitated, became enraged and began to inveigh against those two 
heroes, Shuka and Sarana, who had completed their report. 
In a voice strangled with fury, he overwhelmed them with 
reproaches as they stood with bowed heads before him, saying : — 
" In sooth it is scarcely fitting that such unpleasing words 
should be uttered by loyal servants to their king who has the 
power to mete out punishment or reward. That you should 
both hymn the praises of the foe belonging to an alien race who 
has come here to attack me, is unbecoming ! In vain have you 
sat at the feet of your elders, spiritual preceptors and the aged, 
since the essential traditions of the scriptures do not rule your 
lives or, if you have imbibed them, you have not remembered 
them ; you are over-burdened with ignorance ! Having such 
unintelligent servants as you are, it is a miracle that I am still 
able to wield the sceptre. Have you no fear of death that you 
dare address me thus insolently, I, whose tongue dispenses 
good and evil ? 
"Even in contact with fire, the forest trees may remain 
standing but an evil-doer cannot escape the condemnation of his 
sovereign ! Did the remembrance of your past services not 
moderate mine ire, I should certainly punish you miserable 
wretches by death, who thus hymn the praises of mine 
adversaries. 
" Begone ! Go hence, leave my presence ! Having regard for 
your past services I shall not put you to death. You are already 
71 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
dead, ungrateful creatures, since you have no devotion for me ! " 
Hearing these accusations, which covered them with confusion, 
Shuka and Sarana paid obeisance to Ravana, saying : — " Be 
thou victorious ! " and withdrew. 
Then Dashagriva said to Mahodara who stood beside him : — 
" Bring me other emissaries quickly ! " 
At this command, that Ranger of the Night, Mahodara, 
without delay summoned spies and these presenting themselves 
in all haste before the king, hailed him with joined palms and 
expressed their desire to see him victorious. 
Thereupon Ravana, the Lord of the Titans, said to those 
agents who were full of confidence, courage and zeal and were 
fearless : — 
" Go and find out Rama's plans, who are his ministers and 
who stand nearest to him in counsel and friendship, what are 
his hours of sleeping and waking and what he intends to do next. 
"A wise monarch who discovers all that concerns his adversary 
through his spies, needs to exert himself only to a moderate 
degree to overcome his enemy on the field of battle." 
"May it be so!" answered the emissaries full of joy and, 
placing Shardula at their head, they honoured their sovereign 
by circumambulating him. Having paid obeisance to that 
powerful Lord of the Titans, those spies set out for where Rama 
and Lakshmana were to be found. 
Leaving in disguise they observed Rama, Lakshmana, 
Sugriva and Bibishana near the Mountain Suvela. Beholding 
that army they were seized with terror and as they stood there, 
the righteous Prince of the Titans, Bibishana, recognized them 
and arrested them but Shardula alone was held captive, 
Bibishana saying : — " This one is the traitor ! '* 
Rama however released Shardula also, who was being 
harassed by the monkeys, having already in his compassion given 
the other titans their freedom. 
Beaten by those impetuous and agile monkeys, they returned 
to Lanka, groaning and beside themselves : and those emissaries, 
valiant rangers of the night, who were wont to penetrate inn) 
enemy territory, returned to Dashagriva and informed him that 
Rama's army was camping in the neighbourhood of the Suvela 
Mountain. 
YUDDHA KANDA 
CHAPTER 30 
Sfiardula gives an Account of his Mission to Ravana 
The King of Lanka's spies informed him that Rama was camping 
with his great army near Mount Suvela and, hearing from them 
of Rama's approach at the head of a vast host, he was perturbed 
and said to Shardula : — 
" Thou appearest to be unmanned which is alien to thy 
nature, O Ranger of the Night ! Can it be that thou hast fallen 
a victim to those savage monkeys ? " 
Thus questioned by that tiger among the titans, Shardula, 
trembling with fear, answered in a faint voice, saying : — 
" O King, it is impossible to spy on those lions among the 
monkeys, who are full of energy and prowess and protected by 
Raghava nor can one interrogate them in order to find out 
anything ! On all sides the approaches are guarded by monkeys 
as big as hills. 
" Scarcely had I penetrated into their ranks when I was recog nized and forcibly seized and myself interrogated in every way 
by those monkeys, who attacked me with their knees, fists, 
teeth and the palms of their hands ; thereafter I was led through 
the entire army by those pitiless monkeys who, having paraded 
me everywhere, brought me into Rama's presence, exhausted 
and bewildered, my limbs covered with blood and wounds. 
They wished to murder me despite my supplications made 
with joined palms, when, fortunately I was saved by Rama who 
cried * Stay ! * * Stay ! ' 
"That prince who has filled the sea with boulders and crags is 
encamped at the gates of Lanka, well equipped with weapons, 
his forces arranged in the form of Garuda1 and he is surrounded 
on all sides by monkeys. Having set me free, he is there full of 
energy advancing on Lanka I Ere he reaches the ramparts, 
do one thing or the other with all speed, either return Sita to 
him immediately or give him battle ! " 
1 In spread eagle formation. 
73 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Having reflected on what he had just heard, the King of the 
Titans, Ravana, made this significant reply : — 
** Even were the Gods, Gandharvas and Danavas to arraign 
themselves against me and were the whole world in peril, I 
would not restore Sita." 
Then that exceedingly powerful one added : — 
" Thou hast explored the ranks of their army, who are the 
warriors among the Plavamgamas ? What is the measure of 
their prowess ? Who are these invincible monkeys ? Whose 
sons and grandsons are they ? Tell me the truth, 0 Faithful 
Friend ! " 
Thus interrogated, Shardula, the most skilled of envoys, 
began to speak thus in Ravana's presence : — 
" First there is the son of Riksharajas, invincible in war, O 
King, and the son of Gadgada. There follows another son of 
Gadgada and the son of the spiritual preceptor of Shatakratu, 
the father of the monkey who slew so many titans. Thereafter 
comes the virtuous Sushena, the valiant son of Dharma, then 
Saumya born of Soma, O King, and the monkey Dadimukha 
and Sumukha, Durmukha and Vegadarshin, the equals of 
Mrityu, whom Swyambhu formerly begot in the form of 
monkeys, and further there is the great Nila himself, the son 
of the Bearer of the Sacrificial Offerings1 and the son of the 
Wind, Hanuman. Then there is the grandson of Shakra, the 
youthful, invincible and courageous Angada, and Mainda and 
Dvivida who are both valiant and equal to the Ashvins. Five 
are the sons of Vivasvata who resembles Time as the Destroyer, 
Gaja, Gavaya, Gavaksha, Sharabha and Gandharaadana. 
" There are ten kotis of monkeys full of prowess and martial 
ardour and I was unable to count the rest of those fortunate 
children of the Gods. 
" That son of Dasaratha with the body of a lion, that youth, 
Rama, to whom none in the world can be compared for valour, 
slew Dushana, Khara, Trishiras and Viradha who fell under 
his blows, as also Kabandha, the equal of Antaka. No one is 
able to describe Rama's qualities by whom the titans who went 
to Janasthana were slain. 
*' There too is the virtuous Lakshmana like unto the foremost 
1 The God of Fire. 
74 
YUDDHA KANDA 
of elephants, Matanga, in the path of whose shafts Vasava 
himself could not survive ! There are also Shveta and 
Jyotirmukha, both born of Bhashkara and the son of Varuna, the 
monkey Hemaketu. The heroic son of Vishvakarma, the 
foremost of monkeys Nala, and the impetuous son of Vasu, 
Durdhara. 
" Finally there is that prince of the titans, thy brother Bibishana, 
on whom Rama has conferred the City of Lanka as the reward 
for his devotion. Thus I have described the entire army of 
monkeys stationed on the Mount Suvela ; it is for thee to decide 
what remains to be done ! " 
chapter 3 I 
Havana deceives Sita about the Death of Rama 
Meanwhile the king's spies spread the tidings in Lanka that 
Raghava was encamped with his powerful forces on Mount 
Suvela. 
Ravana, who knew, through bis emissaries, of Rama's arrival 
at the head of a vast army, somewhat perturbed, said to his 
attendants :— 
" Let all the ministers assemble here immediately ! O Titans, 
the time has come to take counsel together ! " 
On this command, his counsellors instantly came together 
and he entered into conference with those loyal titans, then, 
having duly deliberated with them concerning the immediate 
measures to be taken, Durdharsha1 dismissed them all and 
returned to his abode. 
Taking with him the Titan Vidyujjihva, a powerful and skilled 
magician, he turned his steps towards the place where Maithili 
was to be found. Thereafter the King of the Titans said to 
Vidyujjihva, who was proficient in magic : — 
" With thy spells, create an illusion in order to deceive 
Janaka's daughter! Do thou produce a head resembling 
1 Durdharsha-— A name given to Havana meaning 'Dreadful, 
Unapproachable '. 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Raghava's and a mighty bow, its arrows set, and then present 
thyself before me ! " 
On this command, that Ranger of the Night, Vidyujjihva, 
answered " Be it so " and displayed his powers as a magician, 
whereupon Ravana, satisfied, bestowed rich attire upon him. 
In his impatience to behold Sita once again, that mighty 
monarch of the Nairritas entered the Ashoka Grove and the 
younger brother of Dhanada beheld that unfortunate One who 
did not deserve her fate, her head bowed, plunged in grief, 
lying on the ground in the Ashoka Grove where she had been 
banished, absorbed in the thought of her lord, hideous titan 
women seated not far distant from her. 
Then Ravana, approaching, manifested his gratification and 
addressed that daughter of Janaka in confident tones, saying : — 
" O Beautiful One, he in whom thou didst trust at the time 
when thou didst repel me when I sought to console thee, that 
murderer of Khara, thy consort Raghava, has been slain in 
combat. Thy roots are completely severed and thy pride 
humbled by me ; in consequence of the calamity that has over taken thee, thou art mine I Give up thy resolution therefore, 
what wilt thou do with one dead ? O Beautiful One, become the 
chief Queen over all my consorts, thou who till now hast 
enjoyed so little happiness, thou who art without resources ! O 
Foolish One, who deemest thyself wise, hear how, like unto 
the destruction of Vritra, thy lord was slain ! 
" In order to destroy me, Raghava alighted on the shore of the 
sea surrounded by a vast army assembled by the King of the 
Monkeys. Having ranged the northern shore with his great 
legions, Rama struck camp when the sun set. Sending out 
my spies to reconnoitre, they came upon that host stationed 
there overcome with fatigue, fast asleep at midnight.. 
" Under the command of Frahasta, my great forces destroyed 
them during the night and Rama and Lakshmana were amongst 
them. The titans, wielding harpoons, maces, discus, daggers, 
sticks, great arrows, spears, shining Kutamudgaras, picks, 
lances, darts, millstones, massed weapons and a hail of missiles, 
made use of them again and again in order to stiike down the 
monkeys. Thereafter the impetuous Prahasta with a steady 
hand severed the head of the sleeping prince with his sword, 
76 
YUDDHA KANDA 
" Bibishana, who was wandering about aimlessly, was taken 
captive whilst Lakshmana and the monkey warriors fled in all 
directions. Sugriva, the King of the Plavagas had his neck 
broken, O Sita ; Hanuman of the fractured jaw was slain by the 
titans. Jamba van, while attempting to rise from his knees 
perished in the m&ee like an axed tree pierced by innumerable 
harpoons. Mainda and Dvivida, those two great scourgers of 
their foes, the foremost of monkeys, groaning and breathless, 
their limbs bathed in blood were cut to pieces by the sword, and 
Panasa, crying for help, was stretched on the earth under a tree 
of the same name. Pierced by countless Narachas, Darimukha 
is lying in a pit and the exceedingly valiant Kumuda died 
shrieking, under a hail of missiles. Angada, assailed on all 
sides by titans, pierced by innumerable shafts, vomiting blood, 
fell on the earth and the monkeys themselves were crushed by 
elephants and mowed down like clouds before the wind. 
" The enemy fled in terror under the blows of the titans, who 
followed on their heels like lions pursuing great elephants. 
Some flung themselves into the sea, others took refuge in the 
sky ; the bears with the monkeys climbed the trees whilst the 
titans of fierce glance brought about a great carnage amongst 
the Pingalas in the midst of the rocks and woods on the shores 
of the ocean. It was thus that thy consort perished with his 
forces ! Here is his head, which was gathered up, dripping 
with blood and besmeared with dust ! " 
Thereafter that abominable Ravana, the Lord of the Titans, 
said to the titan women in the hearing of Sita : — 
"Bring hither Vidyujjihva of cruel deeds, who himself 
brought back Raghava's head from the field ! " 
Then Vidyujjihva, holding the head and the bow, bowed 
before Ravana, whereupon the King said to that Titan 
Vidyujjihva of the long tongue, who stood before him :— 
" Let Sita speedily behold the head of Dasaratha's son so that 
she may see clearly the sad end of her lord. " 
On this command, the titan threw the cherished head at 
Sita's feet and immediately went away. Ravana, however, 
brandishing that great and brilliant bow, cried out : — 
" Here is Rama's bow famed in the Three Worlds ! This is 
the bow with its cord stretched belonging to Rama that Prahasta 
77 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
brought back from the field after he had slain that hero in the 
night ! " 
Speaking thus, he cast the bow on the ground near the head, 
which had been thrown down by Vidyujjihva, and thereafter he 
addressed that illustrious daughter of the King of Videha, 
saying : — 
" Now submit thyself to my desire ! " 
chapter 32 
Sita*s Despair 
Beholding that head and the marvellous bow and remembering 
the alliance with Sugriva of which Hanuman had spoken ; seeing 
those eyes and the hue of the countenance resembling that of 
her lord and the locks at the fringe of which a jewel shone on 
the brow, all those signs that convinced her of her misfortune, 
that wretched woman began to inveigh against Kaikeyi and 
cry out like an osprey, exclaiming : — 
" Rest content, O Kaikeyi ! He, who was the delight of his 
House is dead and, through thee, the entire race has perished, 
O Sower of Discord ! What had the noble Rama ever done to 
Kaikeyi that she should have presented him with a robe of bark 
and sent him to the forest ? " 
Speaking thus, Vaidehi began to tremble and that young 
ascetic fell to the ground like a plantain cut to the roots. After 
a time the youthful large-eyed woman, regaining her breath 
and consciousness, approached the head and gave herself up 
to lamentation, crying : — 
" Alas ! I am undone ! O Great-armed Warrior, faithful to 
thine heroic vow, bereft of thee, I have fallen into the lowest 
depth of calamity. It is said that for a woman, the death of her 
husband is the greatest of misfortunes ! Virtuous consort of a 
faithful companion, thou hast preceded me in death ! I have 
fallen into the last extremity and am swallowed up in an ocean 
of grief, since thou hast been struck down, thou who else had 
risen to deliver me! My mother-in-law, Kaushalya, who 
78 
YUDDHA KANDA 
cherished thee tenderly, thou, her son Raghava, now resembles 
a cow that has lost its calf. Those who boast that they can 
foretell the future prophesied a long life for thee ; false were 
their words, for thou hast barely lived, O Rama, or does prudence 
perchance sometimes desert those who are usually prudent as thou 
wert, for time, the master of all beings brings all to maturity ? 
How has death been able to steal upon thee unawares, O Thou, 
versed in the law of polity and the science of expediency, who 
wert so skilled in warding off evil ? For having clasped me in 
thine arms, that cruel and inhuman night of death has robbed 
thee of existence by force, O Lotus-eyed One. Here art thou, 
lying on the ground, O Long-armed Warrior, having deserted 
me for the earth, thy more cherished love, O Lion among Men ! 
O Hero, here lies thy golden bow so dear to me, which I 
anointed with perfumes and decorated with garlands ! Thou 
art now re-united in heaven with thy Sire Dasaratha, my 
father-in-law and all thine ancestors, O Irreproachable 
Prince! 
" Thou dost disdain to rejoin the saintly race of Rajarishis, who 
through the merit of their virtuous conduct have taken their 
places amongst the constellations. Why dost thou not look on 
me, O King ? Why dost thou not speak to me, I, thy spouse, 
who joined my youth to thine ? Dost thou not recall the promise 
made to me when, taking my hand in thine, thou didst say * I 
shall be thy companion ? ' O Kakutstha, take me with thee, 
wretched as I am! 
" Why, leaving this world for the other hast thou abandoned 
me in mine affliction, O Thou, the wisest of Sages ? Wild 
beasts are tearing that beautiful body, now a corpse, which was 
formerly perfumed by my hands with divine essences. Having 
performed the Agnihotra and other sacrifices, accompanied 
by the bestowal of splendid gifts in charity, how is it that 
thou art not honoured by the performance of that same 
ceremony ? 
Kaushalya, a prey to grief will see Lakshmana alone return 
of the three who went into exile On her enquiry he will inform 
her of the destruction of thine allies and how thou wert slain 
while asleep, whilst I was taken into the abode of the titans, 
whereupon her heart will break ; Kaushalya will not survive, 
79 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
O Ragbava ! Miserable creature that I am, it is on my account 
that the irreproachable Rama who is full of valour, having 
crossed the ocean has perished in the footprint of a cow. It 
was in an ill-judged moment that the son of Dasaratha wedded 
me, I, the obloquy of my race, for thus did the illustrious Rama 
wed death. Without doubt in a previous existence I refused a 
rare gift,1 1 who to-day weep for my lord, who here was dear to 
all. 
" O Ravana, unite the wife with the husband and, without 
delay, let me die near Rama. Join my head with his head and 
my body with his body ; O Ravana, let me follow in the path 
of my magnanimous lord ! " 
Thus in her burning grief did that large-eyed princess, born 
of Janaka, lament on seeing the head and bow of her lord and, 
as Sita was thus bewailing, a titan, who was standing guard at 
the gate, ran to his master with joined palms, crying : — 
" Mayest thou be victorious, O Noble Lord ! " thereafter, 
approaching, he informed him of the arrival of Prahasta, the 
leader of the army, saying : — 
" Prahasta, accompanied by all the ministers, has come hither 
to find thee ! O Mighty Monarch, thou whom the burden of 
royalty has rendered forbearing, accord him audience for some 
urgent decision must be taken ! " 
Hearing these words of the titan, Dashagriva left the Ashoka 
Grove and went to join his counsellors. Then, having deliber ated with them as to what action to pursue, he entered the council 
chamber and issued his commands in accordance with the 
knowledge he possessed of Rama's forces. 
Meanwhile the instant Ravana had departed, the illusory 
head and bow vanished. 
Then the King of the Titans, in consultation with his highly 
powerful ministers, decided on the measures he would adopt 
against Rama. All the generals devoted to his interests stood 
near and Ravana the Lord of the Titans resembled Death the 
Destroyer while he addressed them, saying : 
" With the beating of drums, summon all the forces without 
further explanation ! " 
1 Refused a rare gift — Some Commentators interpret this as having 
obstructed a marriage. 
so 
YUDDHA KANDA 
" So be it ! " they answered obedient to his commands and 
instantly gathered the vast army together and, when they were 
all assembled, informed the king who was burning to fight. 
chapter 3 3 
Sarama consoles Sita 
Seeing Sita in distress, that dear Vaidehi whom she loved so 
tenderly, a female titan named Sarama approached her and, with 
gentle words, sought to console her, overwhelmed as she was 
with the grief and anguish into which that Indra among the 
titans had plunged her. 
The affectionate Sarama, beholding Sita distraught, resembling 
a mare, who having rolled in the dust has just risen, reassured 
her and, in her deep devotion for that virtuous princess, said 
to her : — 
" That which Ravana uttered and what thou thyself didst 
reply was overheard by me as I stood concealed in the solitary 
grove, for where thou art the cause, I have no fear of Ravana, 
O Lady of Large Eyes ! And I have also learnt, through my 
perspicacity, why that Lord of the Titans has gone hence in 
fear, O Maithili. 
" It is not possible to take the prudent Rama by surprise 
during sleep nor can one slay the foremost of those conversant 
with the Self nor is it possible to wipe out the monkeys who fight 
with trees and who are under Rama's protection like the Gods 
under the King of the Celestials. With his long rounded arms, 
that broad-chested powerful archer, full of fire, clad in mail, 
who is essentially virtuous and renowned in the world, has, with 
the support of his brother Lakshmana, ever known how to defend 
himself and others ; he, that illustrious warrior versed in the 
science of politics and warfare, the exterminator of hostile 
battalions, of inconceivable courage, nay that fortunate Raghava, 
the scourge of his foes, has not perished, 0 Sita. 
" Perverse in thought and action, that tyrant who oppresses 
all beings, made use of magic to deceive thee. Banish thy 
8i 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
grief, great happiness awaits thee ! Assuredly thou art beloved 
of Lakshmi ; now hear some pleasant tidings, O Blessed One ! 
" Having crossed the ocean with his army of monkeys, Rama 
has come to the southern shore where he has encamped. I 
perceive that Kakutstha, who is accompanied by Lakshmana, 
has fully attained his purpose, he is secure in the midst of 
innumerable allies who have halted on the shores of the 
sea. 
" Zealous titans sent out to reconnoitre by Ravana have 
brought him news of Raghava's crossing the ocean. Learning 
of this, O Large-eyed Princess, he held a council of his ministers." 
While Sarama, the titan woman, was conversing thus with 
Sita, a terrifying clamour issuing from the full-throated titans 
came to her ears and a great din of gongs struck with sticks 
could be heard. Thereupon the gentle-speaking Sarama said 
to Sita : — 
" Listen to that formidable clang of gongs struck with sticks 
which resembles thunder. Intoxicated elephants are saddled 
and steeds harnessed to chariots ; hosts of combatants are to be 
seen with darts in their hands mounted on their horses, fully 
equipped, rushing hither and thither in their thousands. The 
royal highways are choked with soldiers wonderful to behold, 
leaping and roaring like the waves of the sea. Glittering 
armour, breast-plates, shields, chariots, horses and elephants 
belonging to the titans full of fire and courage, surging forward, 
follow in the wake of their king. See how they send forth shafts 
of light of every hue. That multitude of titans indicates that a 
terrible calamity is about to descend on them causing the hair 
to stand on end. 
" Rama, thy consort, whose eyes resemble lotus petals, like 
unto Vasava the Vanquisher of the Daityas, will win thee back 
by slaying Ravana in combat by his unimaginable prowess, 
whereupon, his anger appeased, he will take thee away. Thy 
lord with Lakshmana will fall on the titans as Vasava with 
Vishnu on his enemies the Daityas. I shall soon see thee in the 
lap of Rama who has come hither, all thy desires fulfilled and 
the tyrant fallen. Tears of joy will fall from thine eyes, O 
Janaki, when thy lord, re-united with thee, will hold thee 
clasped to his breast. Ere long, O Divine Sita, that mighty 
82 
YUDDHA KANDA 
Rama will loosen the plait that hangs down thy back which thou 
hast worn these many months. 
" Beholding his radiant countenance resembling the full 
moon, O Queen, thou wilt renounce thy tears, born of grief, as 
the female snake casts off its slough. 
" Having destroyed Ravana in combat, he will assuredly not 
delay in rejoicing thee, O Maithili, thou, his beloved, so that he 
may enjoy the felicity he merits. Embraced by the magnani mous Rama, thou shalt be happy, even as the open field bringing 
forth a harvest under plenteous showers. Do thou now seek 
refuge with him, O Queen, that sun, thine haven, which spreads 
from here to the highest of mountains, like a steed that courses 
rapidly in its path, he is the Lord of all beings ! " 
chapter 34 
Sarama spies on Ravana's Plans 
Sita, who had been overwhelmed with misery on hearing 
Ravana's words, was comforted and rendered happy by Sarama, 
as the parched earth by rain. Desiring to be of further service 
to her friend, the affectionate female titan, skilled in the know ledge of time and place, smiling, began to speak in apposite 
terms, saying : — 
" O Dark-eyed Lady, I am able to carry a message of goodwill 
from thee to Rama and return secretly, for when I am journeying 
in the sky, that is extended without support, not even Pavana or 
Garuda can follow in my wake." 
Thus spoke Sarama, and Sita, her voice no longer charged 
with grief, answered in gentle and caressing tones, saying : — 
" Thou art capable of ascending to heaven itself or descending 
into the nethermost regions. Learn what is best for thee to do, 
if thine intention is to please me and thy resolve is fixed. I 
wish to know what Ravana is doing now. That powerful 
magician, the ruthless Ravana, a real Ravana1 to his foes, has 
bemused me with his wickedness as wine recently imbibed ; 
* Ravana — One who causes others to roar or cry out, 
83 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
he threatens me continually and insults me unceasingly while 
titans of frightful aspect surround me ; I am a prey to terror and 
my spirit is uneasy. He causes me to tremble with fear in this 
Ashoka Grove where I am confined. If in the assembly there 
be any talk of delivering me or keeping me captive, then com municate the decision taken to me and thou wilt render me a 
great service." 
Thus spoke Sita and Sarama answered in gentle tones, wiping 
the tears from her face the while : — 
" If this be thy wish, I will go at once and when I have 
discovered his design, I will return, O Maithili, O Daughter of 
Janaka ! " 
With these words she returned to where Ravana was to hear 
what decision he had taken with his ministers. 
Having listened secretly and learnt of the plans that perverse 
wretch had made, she returned to the enchanting Ashoka Grove. 
On entering there, she beheld the daughter of Janaka waiting 
for her, like unto Lakshmi bereft of her lotus. 
Thereupon Sita ardently embraced Sarama who had returned 
and addressed her in friendly tones, offering her hei own seat, 
saying : — 
" Rest at ease and tell me exactly all that the ruthless Ravana 
of perverse soul has resolved to do." 
Then Sarama described the whole interview of Ravana with 
his ministers to the trembling Sita, saying : — 
" The mother of the King of the Titans, through an aged 
counsellor, who is devoted to her, insisted again and again that 
they should let Vaidehi go, saying : — 
" 'Let them return Maithili honourably to that King of Men 1 
His astonishing exploits in Janasthana should be a lesson to 
thee ; what mortal could have accomplished the crossing of the 
ocean, the discovery of Sita by Hanuman and the carnage of 
the titans in combat ? * 
" Thus did the elderly minister and his mother exhort him 
but be is no more capable of giving up his treasure than a miser 
his gold. He will never set thee free unless he is slain in combat, 
O Maithili ; such is the resolve of that wicked wretch made with 
his counsellors ; impelled by death his determination is fixed. 
Fear will never cause Ravana to let thee go ; nor will he do so 
84 
YUDDHA KANDA 
till he is struck down by weapons or all the titans and he himself 
have succumbed. When he has destroyed Ravana with bis sharp 
arrows in combat, Rama will take thee back to Ayodhya, O 
Dark-eyed Lady ! " 
At that moment the cheering of the whole army blended 
with the roll of drums and the blare of trumpets arose and the 
earth shook. That tumult raised by the monkey forces was 
heard by the adherents of the King of the Titans, who were 
assembled in Lanka, and their spirits fell. Seeing no hope on 
account of their sovereign's offence they were plunged in 
despondency. 
CHAPTER 3 5 
Malyavan advises Ravana to make peace 
It was to the beating of gongs and the blare of trumpets that 
the long-armed Rama, the conqueror of hostile cities, approached 
Lanka and, on hearing this tumult, the Lord of the Titans 
paused a moment to reflect and then addressed his ministers. 
The mighty Ravana, in a voice that resounded through the 
hall, began to decry Rama, bis valour, the strength of bis arms 
and his crossing of the ocean, saying : — 
" I have heard all that is reported of Rama ; I know too of 
your courage in the field, yet, on beholding that valiant warrior, 
you now look on each other in silence ! " 
Thereupon hearing the words of Ravana, whose maternal 
grandfather he was, the highly intelligent Titan Malyavan 
answered him thus : — 
" O King, that monarch who is versed in the fourteen sciences, 
who follows polity, rules an empire over a long period and 
overcomes his adversaries, who concludes peace or wages 
war at a fitting time, advances his own party and attains 
great power. A monarch should ally himself to one stronger 
than himself or to an equal ; he should never underrate a foe and 
if he is more powerful, should make war on him. On this 
account X counsel an alliance with Rama and the return of Sita 
o 85 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
who is the actual cause of the dispute. Devas, Rishis, Gand harvas, all desire him to triumph ; do not wage war but resolve 
to make peace with him ! 
" The blessed Grandsire created two paths that rest either on 
righteousness or unrighteousness, the path of the Gods and the 
path of the titans. Righteousness is the path of the magnani mous Immortals and unrighteousness that of the demons and 
titans. When virtue consumed evil, it was the Krita Age and 
when wrong-doing swallowed up virtue, the Tishya planet was 
in the ascendant and thou, adopting unrighteousness, didst 
range the worlds destroying virtue ; it is on account of this that 
thy foes have waxed powerful ! The serpent of evil, nourished 
by thy folly, is now consuming us, while those allied with the 
Gods are fortified by their practice of virtue. A slave of the 
senses, all that thou undertakest excites the wrath of the 
ascetics, those personifications of the Fire-God whose power 
is as irresistible as the glowing flames. They purify their souls 
through austerities and find satisfaction in the performance of 
their duty. In truth, those Twice-born offer innumerable and 
excellent sacrifices, kindling the sacred fire in accordance with 
prescribed rituals ; they recite the Vedas in a loud voice and 
utter sacred texts while subduing the titans. Scattered in all 
directions, like the stormy waves during the hot season, the 
smoke, arising from the Agnihotra performed by those Rishis, 
the equals of Agni, spreads over the ten cardinal points and 
diminishes the titans' energy. In the various regions sanctified 
by their religious observances, the burning austerity of those 
ascetics torments the titans. 
" Thou hast received the boon of invincibility from Devas, 
Danavas and Yakshas but these are men, bears and powerful 
Golangulas who, full of energy and prowess, are coming hither 
roaring like lions. Beholding these sinister and formidable 
portents of every kind, I foresee the total extermination of the 
titans. With a terrifying clamour, monstrous clouds, inspiring 
horror, rain hot blood on Lanka on every side. Those beasts 
drawing the chariots are shedding tears. Discoloured with 
dust, the four quarters no longer shine ; serpents, jackals and 
vultures are invading Lanka, gathering in the public squares 
with frightful cries ; standing before us in dream, coal black 
86 
YUDDHA KANDA 
women with white teeth resembling Kali burst into loud 
laughter, pillaging the dwellings and chattering incoherently ; 
in the houses, dogs devour the sacred offerings and donkeys are 
born of cows, rats of mongoose ; cats mate with tigers, pigs 
with dogs and Kinneras with demons and men. Red-footed 
and white pigeons, messengers of death, by their flight foretell 
the extermination of the titans ; domesticated parrots, falling 
under the attack of other birds, call * Chichikuchi ' ! Birds and 
wild beasts, their eyes fixed on the sun, cry out ! Death in the 
shape of a human monster, deformed, bald and tawny-coloured, 
visits the dwellings in turn. These and other omens equally 
sinister appear. Raghava of fixed prowess is, Z deem, Vishnu 
in human form ; he is undoubtedly no mere man ; he who built 
a bridge over the deep is an exceedingly wonderful being ! 
Therefore, O Ravana, for thine own good, conclude peace with 
Rama who is the king of men." 
Having spoken thus, Malyavan, the bravest of warriors, aware 
of what was passing in Ravana's mind, eyeing him, became 
silent. 
chapter 36 
Ravana directs Lanka's Defences 
Dashanana1 could not brook Malyavan's salutory utterances 
and, scowling, a prey to anger, tolling his eyes in fury, answered 
him thus : — 
" I have closed mine ears to the speech thou hast made, 
albeit with good intentions ; how canst thou hold a mere man 
like Rama, who is single-handed, without any support but 
that of the deer of the trees, cast off by his sire and exiled to the 
forest, to be of my stature, I, the Lord of the Titans, the terror 
of the Gods ? Dost thou then consider me to, be destitute of 
power? 
" I am at a loss to determine if it be envy of my prowess or 
predelietion for the foe that has brought thee to address such 
1 Ten-faced One. 
87 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
hard words to me, unless it be that thou desirest to spur me on ! 
In truth, what man learned in the science of the Shastras would 
speak thus harshly to a seasoned warrior, were it not to incite 
him? 
" Having borne Sita away from the forest, she who resembles 
Shri bereft of her lotus, why, through fear, should I return her 
to Raghava ? Thou shalt see him fall under my blows in the 
midst of the innumerable monkeys who surround him. How 
should Ravana, whom the Deities themselves dare not meet in 
single combat, experience fear in this encounter? Rather 
would I be cut in twain than bend before any ! Such was I 
from birth, it is my nature and unalterable ! Even if Rama by 
some happy chance has been able to throw a bridge over the sea, 
what great marvel is there in that, that thou shouldst give way 
to terror ? It is true he has crossed the ocean with an army of 
monkeys but I swear to thee he will not return alive." 
Beholding Ravana to be highly provoked and speaking with 
such fury, Malyavan, abashed, did not reply and duly invoking 
his success as courtesy demanded, he begged permission to 
retire. 
Meanwhile Ravana, assisted by his ministers, having deliber ated on what ought to be done, set about planning the defence 
of Lanka. 
Thereafter he gave over the eastern gate to the Titan Prahasta 
and that of the south to the warriors Mahaparshwa and 
Mahodara. At the western gate he placed his son Indrajita, 
a powerful magician, with a considerable force of titans and he 
established Shuka and Sarana at the northern gate, saying : — 
" I myself shall take up that position also ! " 
Finally he commanded the Titan Virupaksha, who was full of 
energy and courage, to occupy the centre of the city with a large 
number of soldiers. 
Taking every precaution for the safety of Lanka, that bull 
among the titans, under the sway of destiny, deemed his purpose 
accomplished. Having made provision for the defence of the 
city, he dismissed his ministers and received the acclamations 
of the assembly, after which he entered his sumptuous inner 
apartments. 
88 
YUDDHA KANDA 
CHAPTER 37 
Rama makes his Plans for the Attack 
Meanwhile that King of Men, the Sovereign of the Monkeys, 
the Son of the Wind, Jambavan the King of the Bears, the Titan 
Bibishana with Bali's son Angada and Saumitri, the Ape 
Sharabha, also Sushena and his kinsfolk Mainda and Dvivida, 
Gaja, Gavaksha, Kumuda, Nala and Panasa, all having reached 
the enemy's territory, assembled to take counsel together. 
They said : — " Yonder under our very eyes is the City of Lanka 
defended by Ravana, impregnable even to the Gods and Asuras 
together or the Uragas and Gandharvas. Let us take counsel 
as to what means to adopt that will ensure the success of our 
expedition in order to penetrate into the eternal retreat of 
Ravana, the King of the Titans.'* 
At this, the younger brother of Ravana, Bibishana, uttered 
these words that were both just and irreproachable : — 
" Anala, Panasa, Sampati and Pramati have been to Lanka 
from whence they have returned. Assuming the form of birds, 
all four entered that hostile citadel and studied the measures 
taken by Ravana closely. I will give a detailed report as it was 
given to me of the defences organized by that perverse wretch ; 
O Rama, hear me ! 
" At the eastern gate, Prahasta is stationed with his division ; 
at the southern gate are the warriors Mahaparshwa and 
Mahodara; Indrajita is at the western gate where he is in 
command of a considerable force armed with harpoons, swords, 
bows, spears and hammers. Ravana's son has thousands of 
warriors under his command, holding lances in their hands, 
furnished with weapons of every kind. 
" Apprehensive, a prey to great anxiety, Ravana, versed in the 
sacred formulas, is himself stationed with the titans at the 
northern gate. As for Virupaksha, he, with a strong detachment 
armed with spears, clubs and bows occupies the centre of the 
city. 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
" Having seen these hosts thus distributed, my spies have set 
out in all haste and returned again. The elephants number 
some ten thousand, the cavalry twenty thousand and there are 
more than a million foot soldiers. Hardy and vigorous, these 
intrepid warriors have ever been their sovereign's favourites; 
each of the titan generals, when on campaign, commands a 
million soldiers, O Lord of Men." 
Having conveyed this information concerning the city, the 
mighty Bibishana brought his envoys before Rama and those 
titans confirmed all that was known regarding Lanka. Thereafter 
the younger brother of Havana, in his desire to please Raghava, 
addressed that Lotus-eyed One further, saying : — 
" O Rama, when Ravana made war on Kuvera, seven million 
soldiers accompanied him. For vigour, daring, energy, extreme 
power of endurance and pride, they equalled their wicked king. 
There is no question here of my wishing to agitate thee by what 
I have said but a desire to rouse thine indignation, not thy fears, 
for in knightly valour, thou art equal to the Gods themselves. 
Having set out these monkey forces in battle airay, thou shalt 
destroy Ravana with thy great army composed of four angas1 
which surround thee." 
Bibishana having spoken thus, Raghava gave his orders for 
the attack, saying : — 
" At the eastern gate, Nila, that lion among monkeys, should 
oppose Prahasta with his innumerable infantry and let Bali's 
son, Angada, at the head of a strong division, drive away 
Mahaparshwa and Mahodara from the southern gate ; that son 
of the Wind, whose valour is immeasurable, will penetrate into 
the city with his great forces. 
" I reserve the right to slay the wicked King of the Titans, 
who owing to the boon he has received enjoys oppressing the 
Daityas and Danavas as also the magnanimous Rishis and who 
ranges the worlds persecuting all beings. With the aid of 
Saumitri I shall force an entry through the northern gate and 
follow in the wake of Ravana and his army. Let the mighty 
Indra among Monkeys, the valiant King of the Bears and the 
younger brother of the Lord of the Titans occupy the central 
position. 
1 Angas — lit. limbs, probably divisions. 
90 
YUDDHA KANDA 
" The monkeys should not assume human form in the fray 
for, when we are fighting in the ranks, the monkey shape should 
serve as a sign of recognition amongst us. Seven will attack 
the foe in human form, I, my brother Lakshmana, who is full 
of valour, my friend Bibishana and his four companions." 
Having said this to Bibishana for the success of the enterprise, 
Rama, in the role of a wise leader, decided to stay on Mount 
Suvela whose ravishing slopes he had observed. 
Thereafter at the head of his great army which spread over 
the earth, the magnanimous Rama set out for Lanka with a 
joyous and exultant air, resolved to destroy his enemy. 
chapter 3 8 
The Ascent of Mount Suvela 
Having resolved to stay on Mount Suvela, Rama, followed by 
Lakshmana, addressed Sugriva and also Bibishana the night ranger, who was full of integrity, devotion, sagacity and 
experience and, in tones of great sweetness and nobility, said : — 
" Let us ascend the Mount Suvela, that king of peaks and 
plateaus, filled with hundreds of metallic veins, in order to pass 
the night there. Then we shall be able to survey Lanka, the 
haunt of that titan, that wretch who has borne away my consort 
to his own destruction ! He has neither regard for justice, 
virtue nor the honour of his House, he, who, in consequence of 
his base nature, has committed this heinous deed." 
Thus reflecting and censuring Ravana, Rama approached 
Mount Suvela with its ravishing slopes and began the ascent. 
Behind him came Lakshmana, proud of his great valour, alert, 
bearing his bow and arrows and Sugriva, who with his ministers 
and Bibishana scaled the mountain also. Those rangers of the 
hills bounded with the speed of the wind scrambling from a 
hundred sides at once in the steps of Raghava and did not take 
long to reach the summit. 
From there they observed that splendid city with its marvellous 
gates enclosed in magnificent ramparts, as if suspended in the 
9i 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
air ; thus did Lanka, filled with warriors, appear to those monkey 
leaders and, standing on those wonderful ramparts, the dark hued titans resembled a second wall in the eyes of the foremost 
monkeys. Beholding them, the monkeys, in Rama's presence, 
burning to fight, redoubled their cries. 
Meanwhile the sun, dyed with the fires of dusk, moved 
towards the west, and the night, illumined by the full moon, 
drew on. Then Rama, the leader of the monkey army, having 
exchanged salutations with Bibishana, established himself 
happily on the breast of Mount Suvela with the leaders of the 
monkeys. 
chapter 39 
Description of Lanka 
Having passed the night on Mount Suvela, the valiant monkey 
generals surveyed the woods and groves of Lanka and observing 
them to be so extensive, agreeable, pleasant, vast and wide, 
marvellous to behold, they were seized with admiration. 
Champakas, Ashokas, Bakulas, Salas and Talas abounded ; 
Tamalas, Hintalas, Arjunas, Nipas, Saptaparnas in full Mower, 
Nagas, Tilakas, Karnikaras and Patalas grew on every side. The 
trees with their flowering crests, round which magnificent 
creepers twined, gave Lanka a brilliant appearance which she 
owed also to the borders planted with diverse flowers and red 
and tender buds as also innumerable shady avenues. The 
blossom and fragrant fruit with which the trees were laden 
caused them to resemble men adorned with jewels or the ravish ing Chaitaratha, the equal of the Nandana Gardens, a grove 
resplendently green in all seasons, filled with swarming bees and 
sparkling with beauty. Then the valiant monkeys able to change 
their shape at will penetrated into those groves frequented by 
waterfowl intoxicated with love and with honey bees where the 
branches of the trees were filled with cuckoos and resounded to 
the notes of the shrike and the cry of the osprey and, as they 
entered there, a breeze redolent with the scent of flowers blew 
like a soft breath. 
9* 
YUDDHA KANDA 
Meanwhile some of the leaders broke away from the monkey 
ranks and, with the permission of their prince, approached that 
paved city. Terrifying the birds, deer and elephants, they 
shook Lanka with their roaring, excelling as they did in shouting 
and, in their immense ardour, they trampled down the earth so 
that the dust rose in clouds under their feet. 
Bears, lions, buffalo, wild elephants, antelopes and birds, 
alarmed by the noise, spread over the ten points of the horizon. 
The Trikuta Mountain had an exceedingly lofty summit 
that appeared to touch the skies ; it was covered with blossom, 
sparkling like gold, a hundred leagues in extent, stainless, 
graceful to behold, smooth, inaccessible in height even to birds 
and could not be scaled even in thought, much less in reality ; 
it was on this promontory that Lanka was built of which 
Ravana was the highway. 
Ten leagues wide, twenty in length, with its tall gates which 
resembled white clouds and its ramparts of gold and silver, 
it was a very marvel ! Palaces and temples were the splendid 
decoration of that city, as clouds at the end of summer are to 
the region of Vishnu that is found between earth and heaven. 
In Lanka, a building of a thousand pillars artistically con structed, resembling the peak of Kailasha which seemed to lick 
the firmament, was to be seen. This was the retreat of the 
Indra of the Titans and the ornament of the city, guarded 
constantly by a hundred titans. Ravishing with its gold, the 
mountains served as its decoration and it was dazzling with its 
rich parks and many squares re-echoing to the song of birds of 
every kind, frequented by deer, covered with various flowers, 
inhabited by titans of every degree, and that opulent city of 
immense resources resembled the celestial regions. 
Beholding that auspicious capital, the valiant elder brother of 
Lakshmana was seized with astonishment and Rama with his 
vast army contemplated that citadel filled with treasure, 
abundantly provisioned, garlanded with palaces, exceedingly 
strong, with its powerful engines of war and solid gates. 
93 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 40 
The extraordinary Combat between Sugriva and Ravana 
Then Rama, accompanied by Sugriva and his monkey leaders, 
ascended the summit of Mount Suvela that had a circumference 
of two leagues ; there he halted awhile, surveying the ten 
cardinal points and his gaze fell on Lanka which was ravishing 
with its enchanting groves that had been built by Vishvakarma 
on the summit of the Trikuta Mountain. 
There above a gateway stood the invincible Lord of the 
Titans, white chanwaras being waved above him and the 
triumphal parasol indicating his rank. Anointed with red 
sandal-paste, adorned with scarlet ornaments, he was attired 
in raiment embroidered with gold and resembled a dark cloud. 
The scars of the wounds, inflicted on him by Airavata with his 
tusks, pitted his breast, and he was wrapped in a cloak of the 
colour of hare's blood so that he appeared like unto a cloud dyed 
with the tints of sunset. 
The Indra of the Monkeys beheld him asRaghava also and, on 
seeing him, Sugriva, gathering up his strength, in an impulse of 
fury suddenly bounded from the summit of the mountain and 
descended at the gate. For a moment he paused, then with a 
fearless soul he eyed that titan whom be regarded as a mere 
straw and thereafter addressed him harshly, saying : — 
" I am the friend of the Protector of the Worlds, Rama ; by 
the grace of that King of Kings thou shalt not escape me to-day." 
Speaking thus he suddenly leapt upon him and, snatching 
off his brilliant diadem, threw it on the earth. 
Seeing him about to rush upon him again, that Ranger of the 
Night said to him : — 
" Sugriva thou wert unknown to me, now thou shalt be 
Hinagriva I1 " 
Speaking thus, he threw himself upon him and with his two 
arms flung him to the ground. Bouncing up like a ball, that 
monkey struck his adversary in his turn and perspiration broke 
1 Sugriva meaning ' handsome-necked ' and Hinagriva ' necklet* '. 
94 
YUDDHA KANDA 
out on the limbs of both and their bodies were red with blood ; 
each clung to the other, paralysing his opponent's movements 
and they resembled the Shalmali and Kimshuka Trees. 
Then followed blows and slaps with hands and arms and an 
indescribable struggle arose between the two powerful kings, 
the Lords of the Titans and Monkeys. Hard and long was the 
combat between these two doughty champions in the gateway, 
each in turn lifting the other up, crouching and changing their 
positions, tripping each other and throwing each other down, 
crushing one another, bruising each other's limbs, and, falling 
between the Sala Trees and the moat, they would leap up again, 
pausing an instant to regain their breath. Then, with arms 
interlaced like ropes, they remained locked together, struggling 
and furious, full of skill and energy, moving to and fro. Like 
a lion and a tiger or two young elephants, that have just grown 
their tusks, scrutinising each other, with arms interlaced and 
grappling with one another, they fell on the earth together. 
Thereafter, rising, they hurled themselves on each other afresh, 
circling round the arena again and again, like skilled and mighty 
wrestlers nor were they easily fatigued. Like unto great tuskers, 
with their enormous arms resembling the trunks, they gripped 
each other tightly. Circling round and round in that duel 
which was long and fierce, they trampled down the earth and, 
approaching each other, like two wild cats fighting over a piece 
of meat, each tried to kill his adversary. Taking up diverse 
postures, describing innumerable evolutions, running like an 
ox's urine, halting, coming and going, they executed a myriad 
different movements; stepping sideways, making feints, twisting 
to avoid a blow, turning about, darting to the attack, each 
hurling himself on his opponent, standing firm and erect, 
disengaging themselves, presenting back and flank, preparing to 
leap, letting go or stealing away, thus Sugriva and Ravana, to 
their utmost satisfaction, multiplied such feats in which they 
excelled. 
Meanwhile the titan had recourse to magic and when the 
King of the Monkeys perceived it, he flew into the sky triumph ant, shaking off all fatigue whilst Ravana, overcome with 
exhaustion, breathing heavily, baffled by the King of the 
Monkeys, stood confounded. 
95 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Thus the Lord of the Monkeys, acquiring fame as a warrior, 
having wearied Ravana in combat, ascended into the infinite 
blue with the swiftness of thought, and that offspring of the Sun, 
having accomplished this feat, delighted, rejoined the army, 
honoured by the monkey leaders, thereby increasing the joy 
of the foremost of the Raghus. 
CHAPTER 41 
Rama sends Angada to Ravana 
Seeing him bearing the marks of valour, the elder brother of 
Lakshmana, Rama, embracing him, said to Sugriva : — 
" Without consulting me thou hast acted thus imprudently ; 
such rashness is not seemly in a king. By thy recklessness 
thou hast caused me great anxiety as also the army and Bibishana! 
O Warrior, thou art enamoured of deeds of daring ! Do not act 
thus in the future, 0 Vanquisher of thy Foes ! If thou hadst 
come by some misfortune, what would Sita or Bharata or my 
younger brothers, Lakshmana or Shatrughna have availed me ? 
" O Valiant Scourge of Thy Foes, if thou hadst not returned, 
though I am conversant with thy valour, this was my fixed 
resolve ; having destroyed Ravana in fight with his sons, forces 
and chariots, I should have installed Bibishana as King of 
Lanka, suffered Bharata to ascend the throne and renounced 
my life, O Great Prince." 
At these words of Rama, Sugriva answered, saying : — 
" Seeing the one who had borne away thy consort, O Brave 
Descendant of Raghu, conscious of mine own strength, how 
could I have acted otherwise ? " 
Thus spoke that warrior, and Raghava, having commended 
him, addressed Lakshmana who was endowed with auspicious 
marks, saying : — 
" Beside these cool waters and trees laden with fruit, let us 
divide and marshal our forces, O Lakshmana ! I foresee a 
terrible calamity boding universal destruction and death to the 
intrepid bears, monkeys and titans. Harsh winds blow, the 
96 
YUDDHA KANDA 
earth trembles and the mountains quake ; trees crash to the 
earth, sinister clouds resembling birds of prey roar in terrifying 
wise and let fall rain mixed with blood ; the dusk, red as sandal, 
is full of horror and from the sun, a flaming circle falls. Wild 
beasts and birds emit frantic cries and are ill at ease ; their voices 
and fierce aspect deprive them of their beauty. In the night, 
the moon, shorn of its radiance, surrounded by black and fiery 
rays, burns red, as at the time of the destruction of the world. 
A thin, dark, sinister rim of coppery hue is seen round the sun 
and on its surface a black mark appears nor does that orb 
approach any other planets as is usual, all of which prefigures 
the final dissolution of the world. 
" Behold, O Lakshmana, how crows, eagles and vultures are 
flying low, circulating rapidly, emitting piercing and lugubrious 
cries ! The earth changed to mud and gore will be covered 
with rocks, javelins and darts hurled by the monkeys and titans ! 
This very day, surrounded by the monkeys on all sides, let us 
mate an attack on that citadel defended by Ravana." 
Having spoken thus to Lakshmana, his younger brother, that 
mighty warrior rapidly descended from the summit of the 
mountain and coming to the bottom of that hill, the virtuous 
Raghava inspected his army which was invincible to the foe. 
Then, the time having come, Rama, who was conversant with the 
fitting moment to act, gave the signal to advance and, at an 
auspicious moment, bow in hand, turned towards Lanka. 
Bibishana, Sugriva, Hanuman, Nala, Jambavan the King of 
the Bears, as also Nila and Lakshmana followed, and behind 
them the mighty host of bears and monkeys, covering a vast 
stretch of earth, threw themselves in Raghava's wake. Hundreds 
of rocks and enormous trees served as weapons to those monkeys, 
verily the vanquishers of their foes, who resembled elephants. 
Soon the two brothers, Rama and Lakshmana, those subduers 
of the foe, reached the city of Ravana, garlanded with banners, 
enchanting with the pleasure gardens which adorned it, 
inaccessible with its many gateways, high walls and arches. 
Then those denizens of the forests, encouraged by the sound of 
Rama's voice and obedient to his commands, halted before 
Lanka, which was impregnable, even to the Gods. 
Thereafter Rama, accompanied by his younger brother, bow 
97 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
in hand, surveyed the northern gate, which was as high as the 
peak of a mountain and took up his position there. That 
valiant son of Dasaratha, followed by Lakshmana, advanced 
under the walls of Lanka, whose highway was Ravana. None 
but Rama could have approached and examined the northern 
gate where Ravana stood, which was formidable and guarded by 
him as the ocean by Varuna and which was defended on all 
sides by titans, as the Danavas, who sow terror in the hearts of 
the weak, guard Patala. And Rama observed innumerable 
weapons and armour of every kind heaped there for the combat ants. 
Meanwhile Nila took up his position with Mainda and 
Dvivida at the eastern gate at the head of a host of monkeys. 
Angada with his vast forces, assisted by Rishabha, Gavaksha, 
Ga)a and Gavaya, occupied the southern gate. Hanuman, 
that virtuous monkey, was stationed at the western gate with 
Prajangha, Tarasa and other warriors grouped round him, 
whilst Sugriva, personally occupied an observation post in the 
centre. At the head of all those leading monkeys, the equals of 
Suparna and Pavana, thirty-six kotis of renowned warriors were 
grouped round Sugriva. 
Meanwhile, under Rama's command, Lakshmana, assisted 
by Bibishana, distributed his innumerable divisions at each 
gate. Behind Rama, Sushena and Jarabavan, those lions among 
the monkeys, possessing the teeth of tigers, furnished with trees 
and rocks, waited delightedly for the signal to fight. Lashing 
their tails feverishly, they used their jaws and nails as weapons ; 
trembling in every limb, their faces were set grimly and they 
were extremely strong, some having the strength of ten 
elephants, some ten times more powerful, some equalling a 
thousand elephants in might and there were some who had the 
vigour of a million elephants and even more, for the might of 
those monkey leaders was immeasurable ! Marvellous and 
astonishing was the gathering of those monkey forces resembling 
a cloud of locusts ! The earth and the air were filled with 
monkeys rushing towards Lanka or already stationed beneath 
its walls. By hundreds and hundreds of thousands, bears and 
monkeys poured towards the gates of Lanka that others assailed 
on every side. The hills disappeared completely under that 
98 
YUDDHA KANDA 
host of Plavamgamas, numbering millions, who were ranging 
round the city and those heroic monkeys, with tree trunks 
in their hands, surrounded the whole of Lanka that even the 
winds were unable to penetrate. 
Then the titans, who in their valour rivalled Shafcra, seeing 
themselves besieged by those monkeys like massed clouds, were 
struck with a sudden terror, and, as they broke rank, a 
tremendous clamour arose from that host of combatants which 
resembled the roar of the ocean beating against the shore ! At 
this tumult, the whole of Lanka with its ramparts, arches, hills, 
woods and forests, began to tremble. 
Under the direction of Rama, Lakshmana and Sugriva, that 
army became even more invincible than the hosts of the Gods 
and titans. Raghava, however, having ranged his forces in 
order to wipe out the demons, took counsel with his ministers 
and pondered deeply again and again. Desiring to act without 
delay and with circumspection, he, in his consummate experience 
with Bibishana's approbation, calling to mind the duty of kings1, 
summoned Bali's son, Angada and said to him : — 
" Go My Friend on my behalf and, passing through the Gty 
of Lanka without fear, say to Dashagriva : — ' Thou hast 
sacrificed thy renown, destroyed thy kingdom and, in thine 
haste to die, hast lost thy wits ! Rishis, Devas, Gandharvas, 
Apsaras, Nagas, Yakshas and kings, O Ranger of the Night, 
have been oppressed by thee in thy reckless pride. O Titan, 
from now on, that arrogance, begot of the boon thou didst 
receive from Swyambhu, shall be subdued ! I shall inflict a 
fitting penalty for thy ruthless abduction of my consort ; it is 
with the Rod of Chastisement, that I have stationed myself at 
Lanka's gates.* Having displayed thy martial valour, slain by 
me thou shalt attain the region of the Gods ! Do thou demon strate the same courage that thou didst employ in bearing Ska 
away from me, having first deceived me by magic arts. O 
Most Vile of Titans, I shall rid the earth of titans with my 
pointed shafts, if thou dost not make an appeal to my clemency 
by returning Maithili to me. 
1 Doty of Kings — If a king is able to accomplish his purpose by conciliation, 
he must not use force. 
• That is, in the form of Dandadhara, a name of Death as the Bearer of 
the Rod of Retribution. 
99 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
" * That virtuous prince of the titans, the illustrious Bibishana, 
who is here, will undoubtedly reign in Lanka without opposition. 
Nay, it is not fitting that, even for an instant, the crown should 
belong to one as perfidious as thou art, a wicked creature who 
surroundest thyself with fools and who is not conversant with the 
Self! 
" * Enter into combat with me, O Titan, exert thy strength and 
valour in the fight, mine arrows will chasten thee and thou wilt 
be subdued ! Even shouldst thou range the Three Worlds in 
the form of a bird, O Night-ranger, my glance would follow 
thee and thou wouldst not return alive. I give thee this salutory 
counsel — prepare for thine obsequies, let Lanka regain her 
splendour, thy life is in my hands 1 ' " 
Furnished with Rama's instructions, the son of Tara ascended 
into the air, like unto the God bearing away a sacrificial offering, 
and in an instant arrived at Ravana's palace where he beheld him 
seated at ease amidst his ministers. 
That youthful Prince of the Monkeys, Angada of golden 
bracelets, like a flaming torch descended close to the king and 
having made himself known, addressed the whole of Rama's 
exceedingly significant speech, without adding or subtracting 
anything, to him in the presence of his court, saying : — 
" I am the messenger of the King of Koshala, Rama of 
imperishable exploits. I am the son of Bali, Angada is my 
name ; perchance thou hast heard of me ? The descendant of 
Raghu, Rama, the increaser of Kaushalya's delight, speaks thus 
to thee : — 
"'Come forth and enter into combat with me! Manifest 
thy valour ! I shall destroy thee, thy counsellors, thy sons, 
relatives and allies. Thou being dead, the Three Worlds will 
cease to be troubled, O Thou whose enemies are the Devas, 
Danavas, Yakshas, Gandharvas, Uragas and Rakshasas ; thou 
thorn in the side of the ascetics ! Bibishana will become king 
when thou art slain by me, if thou dost not return Vaidehi, 
having paid her every homage, and cast thyself at my feet 1 ' " 
Hearing these harsh words from that lion among the 
monkeys, the Lord of the Titans, infuriated, issued the following 
command repeatedly to his attendants, saying: — "Seize him 
and put him to death ! " 
YUDDHA KANDA 
On this order being given by Ravana, Angada, who in his 
splendour resembled a blazing torch, was seized by four 
terrible titans and the son of Tara suffered himself to be made 
captive, without offering any resistance, for that valiant warrior 
desired to display his prowess to the host of Yatudhanas. 
Thereafter, seizing three of the titans, like unto serpents in his 
arms, he leapt on to the palace that resembled a mountain. 
Shaken by his impetuous bound the three titans fell to the 
ground under the eyes of their king. Then the powerful son of 
Bali scaled the palace up to its roof, which equalled the summit 
of a mountain in height, and the impact of his bounds caused it to 
crumble before Dashagriva's gaze as a peak in the Himalayas 
is shattered by lightning. 
Having destroyed the roof of the palace, Angada proclaimed 
his name and with a triumphant roar rose into the air. To the 
exceeding terror of the titans and the great delight of the apes, 
he alighted in the midst of the monkeys beside Rama. 
Thereupon Ravana, transported with anger, giving himself 
up for lost began to sigh heavily. Meanwhile Rama, who was 
surrounded by Plavamgamas emitting joyful cries, eager to 
destroy his adversary, advanced to meet him in combat. 
Now Sushena was at the head of innumerable monkeys who 
were able to change their form at will and, under the order of 
Sugriva, he patrolled the gates and that invincible warrior 
resembled the moon moving amidst the stars. 
Seeing the hundreds of divisions encamped under the walls 
of Lanka and marshalled on the shores of the sea, the titans were 
amazed whilst some were terror-struck and others, overjoyed at 
the prospect of fighting, leapt in exultation. Beholding 
those hosts occupying the whole space between the walls and 
the moat, however, and seeing the monkeys like unto a second 
rampart, those rangers of the night, cast down, cried out : — 
" Woe ! Alas ! " in their terror. 
In the midst of that appalling tumult, the soldiers of Ravana 
seized hold of their powerful weapons and advanced like the 
winds that blow at the dissolution of the worlds. 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 42 
The Titans make a Sortie 
Then those titans approached the abode of Ravana and informed 
him that Rama and the monkeys had laid siege to the city. 
This news enraged that Ranger of the Night, who, repeating 
his former commands went up into the palace. From there 
he surveyed Lanka with its hilis, woods and groves, which 
was besieged on all sides by countless divisions of monkeys, 
eager to fight. Beholding the earth all brown with innumerable 
Plavagas, in great perplexity he reflected : " How can they be 
exterminated ? " 
Having pondered long, Ravana regained his confidence and, 
opening his great eyes wide, he gazed on Raghava and the simian 
battalions. 
Meanwhile Rama, at the head of his army was rapidly 
advancing on Lanka which was guarded on all sides and thronged 
with titans. Thereafter the son of Dasaratha, seeing that city 
furnished with flags and banners, remembered Sita and was 
filled with anguish. He reflected " That daughter of Janaka 
whose eyes resemble a young doe's, will be a prey to anxiety on 
my account ! Consumed with grief and emaciated, she is 
pining away, the bare ground her bed ! " 
Reflecting on the sufferings of Vaidehi, the virtuous Raghava 
speedily issued a command to the monkeys to prepare for the 
enemy's destruction. 
Hearing the order of Raghava of imperishable exploits, the 
Plavagas, urging each other on, filled the air with their roaring. 
" Let us demolish Lanka with rocks and stones or with our 
fists alone " was the resolve of the monkey leaders and, under 
the eyes of the King of the Titans, in order to accomplish Rama's 
cherished desire, those troops divided themselves into columns 
and began to scale the heights of Lanka. Hurling themselves 
on that city with rocks and trees, those golden-hued Plavamgamas 
of coppery countenance, willing to lay down their lives in 
YUDDHA KANDA 
Rama's service, destroyed innumerable battlements, ramparts 
and arches with blows from trees, rocks and fists and filled the 
moats and trenches of clear water with sand, stones, grass and logs. 
The commanders led their divisions by thousands and 
hundreds of millions of thousands to attack Lanka and the 
Plavamgamas tore up the golden arches, broke down the gates, 
that equalled the peak of Kailasha in height and from the 
sides and the centre, hurled themselves on the city like great 
elephants with cries of " Victory to the mighty Rama and 
the valiant Lakshmana ! " " Victory to Sugriva protected fay 
Raghava ! " Shouting thus, the monkeys, who were able to 
change their form at will, roaring, rushed to attack the city. 
Virabahu, Subahu, Nala and Fanasa, having demolished some 
of the outposts, reached the foot of the walls and assigned each 
column to a post of attack. The eastern gate was besieged by 
the valiant Kumuda surrounded by ten kotis of triumphant 
monkeys ; his lieutenants were Prasabha and the long-armed 
Fanasa, who were at the head of those forces. 
At the southern gate was the warrior Shatabali, a monkey of 
proved valour, who was stationed with twenty kotis to obstruct 
the exit. Sushena, the father of Tara, full of courage and 
strength, with a hundred thousand monkeys surrounded the 
western gate. The northern gate was blockaded by the mighty 
Rama assisted by Saumitri and Sugriva, the King of the 
Monkeys. 
The colossal Golangula, Gavaksha, of grim aspect and 
immense energy, supported one of Rama's flanks with a koti of 
warriors and the valiant Dhumra, scourger of his foes, supported 
the other flank with a koti of bears of redoubtable fury. 
The intrepid Bibishana, attended by his loyal ministers, 
followed his ally, the heroic Rama, everywhere, whilst Gaja, 
Gavaksha, Gavaya, Sharabha and Gandhamadana patrolled 
every side in defence of the simian army. 
Meanwhile, his heart filled with rage, the King of the Titans 
ordered his troops to make a rapid sortie. At this command 
falling from Ravana's lips, a tremendous clamour arose among 
the rangers of the night and the sound of kettledrums, their 
discs white as the moon, on which the titans beat with sticks of 
gold, broke out on every side, while hundreds and thousands of 
103 
THE R'AMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
trumpets blared forth} blown by the titans with their cheeks 
extended to the full. With their dark limbs adorned with 
ornaments and their conches, those rangers of the night 
resembled clouds bordered with lightning or rows of cranes ; 
and their battalions advanced gaily under Ravana's imperious 
commands as, at the time of Pralaya, the tumultuous sea 
overflows. 
At that moment from every side, a clamour arose from the 
army of the monkeys which filled Malaya with its plains, 
valleys and chasms, and the sound of the trumpets and drums 
and the leonine roars of those warriors re-echoed over the earth, 
sky and sea, as also the trumpeting of elephants, the neighing 
of horses, the clatter of chariot wheels and the thunder of the 
titans marching. 
Thereafter a terrible struggle ensued between the monkeys and 
the titans as, in former times between Gods and Asuras. With 
their naming maces, their spears, harpoons and axes, the titans, 
demonstrating their native prowess, struck the army of the 
monkeys and from their side, those gigantic apes attacked their 
adversaries ferociously with blows from trees, rocks, teeth and 
nails. 
" Victory to King Sugriva ! " yelled the monkeys, " May our 
Sovereign prevail ! " shouted the titans and each proclaimed 
his name, while other demons, standing on the walls, hacked at 
the monkeys below with hooks and harpoons and they, in furiated, leapt into the air and dragged down those soldiers 
stationed on the walls by seizing them with their arms, and 
that conflict between demons and monkeys was appalling and 
the earth was covered with mud and flesh in that astonishing 
fight. 
CHAPTER 43 
The Conflict between the Monkeys and Titans 
Those high-souled monkey troops fought with terrible ferocity 
whilst the titans wakened the ten regions as, mounted on steeds 
with golden trappings or elephants bright as fire or in cars 
104 
YUDDHA KANDA 
flashing like the sun, they issued forth clad in marvellous suits 
of mail, eager to triumph in Havana's name. 
On their side, the mighty army of monkeys, burning for 
victory, hurled themselves on those demons of formidable 
exploits and extraordinary duels arose between titans and 
monkeys who rushed upon each other. 
As Tryambaka fought against Andhaka, so did the son of Bali, 
Angada, fight with Indrajita, who was endowed with immense 
energy. Prajangha was attacked by the ever indomitable 
Sampati and the Monkey Hanuman measured his strength with 
Jambumali. A prey to violent anger, Bibishana, the younger 
brother of Ravana, entered into a furious combat with the 
exceedingly impetuous Shatrughna. The valiant Gaja fought 
with the Titan Tapana and the powerful Nila with Nikumbha. 
That India of Monkeys, Sugriva, attacked Praghasa with 
violence and the fortunate Lakshmana engaged in combat with 
Virupaksha. The unapproachable Agniketu with the Titan 
Rashmiketu, Mitraghna and Yajnakopa unitedly entered into 
combat with Rama, Vajramushti fought against Mainda and 
Ashanipratha against Dvivida, those two foremost of monkeys 
with the greatest of titans. The valiant son of Dharma, 
Sushena, that great monkey of illustrious name, grappled 
with Vidyunmalin and, from every side, other monkeys 
heroically engaged in countless duels with other titans. Then 
an appalling batde, causing the hair to stand on end, took place 
between titans and monkeys who were full of prowess and eager 
to triumph. 
From the bodies of those monkeys and rangers of the night, 
torrents flowed, their hair being the grass, their blood the water 
bearing away heaps of corpses. 
As Shatakratu with his thunderbolt, so Indrajita, with his 
mace, in fury, struck at Angada but that intrepid destroyer of 
enemy hosts shattered his chariot, the framework of which being 
encrusted with gold, and slew his horses and driver. Sampati, 
wounded by Parjangha with three arrows, struck him over the 
head with an Ashvakarna Tree ; Jambumali, standing in his 
chariot, full of strength and fury tore open Hanuman's breast 
in the fight with the force of his driving, but he, who was born 
of the Wind-god, approaching that car, soon overthrew it with 
105 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
the palm of his hand. The redoubtable Pratapana, yelling, 
rushed on Nala, who with his limbs pierced by the pointed 
shafts of that skilful titan, suddenly scratched out his eyes. 
As Praghasa appeared to be consuming the hosts of the King 
of the Monkeys, Sugriva hastily struck him with a Saptaparna 
Tree, while Lakshmana, overwhelmed by a hail of missiles by 
Virupaksha, that titan of ferocious aspect, struck him down with 
a single blow. Thereafter the indomitable Agniketu, the Titans 
Rashmiketu, Mitraghna and Yajnakopa sought to consume Rama 
with their arrows, whereupon he, in fury, with four formidable 
shafts, resembling tongues of fire, severed the heads of all four 
in the struggle. Vajramushti, struck by a blow from Mainda's 
fist in the fight, was overthrown with his chariot, driver and 
horses, which resembled an aerial car belonging to the Gods ; 
Nikumbha battling against Nila, who was like unto a piece of 
collyrium, pierced him with his whetted shafts as the sun with 
its rays pierces a cloud ; and, again and again that deft-handed 
ranger of the night Nikumbha, with a hundred arrows wounded 
Nila in the fray whereupon that monkey began to laugh and 
seizing the wheel of his adversary's chariot, he who resembled 
Vishnu on the battlefield, severed the head of that titan and that 
of his charioteer. 
Dvivida, whose impact was like unto a flash of lightning, 
struck Samaprabha with a great rock at which the titans stared 
in amazement and that foremost of monkeys, Dvivida, who 
fought with blows of trees, was pierced in his turn with arrows 
resembling lightning and his limbs being lacerated by those 
shafts, that monkey grew enraged and with a single blow from 
a Sala Tree struck down the titan, his chariot and his horses. 
Thereafter Vidyunmalin repeatedly emitting loud cries, stand ing in his car, wounded Sushena with gold encrusted arrows 
and seeing him, that foremost of monkeys suddenly overthrew 
the chariot with a great rock. Vidyunmalin however, that agile 
night ranger, sprang down from his car and, mace in hand, 
stood ready on the field whereupon that lion among monkeys, 
infuriated, seizing a great rock, rushed at the titan but as he 
precipitated himself upon him, Vidyunmalin with a deft stroke, 
wounded him in the belly with bis mace. Then the excellent 
Plavaga, receiving that terrible and unexpected blow dealt by 
106 
YUDDHA KANDA 
his opponent, immediately turned and, in a desperate encounter, 
hurled a rock upon him. Struck by that missile, Vidyunmalin, 
that prowler of the night, his chest crushed, fell lifeless on the 
earth. Thus, under the blows of the simian warriors, the 
heroic titans perished in a series of hand to hand encounters as 
the Daityas under the blows of the inhabitants of the Celestial 
Region. Bhallas and other weapons, maces, lances, darts, 
shattered chariots, war-horses that had been slain, as also 
elephants from whose temples ichor exuded and the bodies of 
monkeys and titans, with wheels, axles, yokes and shafts strewed 
the earth ; the carnage was fearful, a veritable jackal's feast. 
The headless trunks of monkeys and titans lay in heaps every where in the midst of that appalling conflict which resembled 
the war between Gods and Asuras. 
In that stubborn engagement, decimated by the foremost of 
monkeys, the rangers of the night as the day ended, maddened 
by the smell of blood, in desperation made preparations for the 
morrow, and those titans, their limbs covered with blood, 
desired nothing so greatly as that night should fall. 
CHAPTER 44 
Angada's Exploit 
During the combat between monkeys and titans, the sun sank 
below the horizon, giving place to a night of carriage. In their 
mutual hostility, monkeys and titans, burning for victory, 
continued to fight in the gathering gloom. 
" Art thou a titan ? " asked the monkeys — " Art thou a 
monkey ? " questioned the titans and struck at each other in the 
darkness. " Strike ! " " Kill ! " " Come hither ! " " Why 
fleest thou ? " could be heard in that appalling struggle. 
Clad in mail, the titans, their dark hue intensified by the 
impenetrable gloom, resembled bills covered with woods 
abounding in phosphorescent herbs and, transported with anger, 
they bounded forward in order to fall on the Plavamgamas 
and devour them, but these hurled themselves on the horses 
with golden plumes and the banners, like unto tongues of fire, 
107 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
and with indescribable fury tore them down with their sharp 
claws. Thus did those mighty monkey warriors sow contusion 
amongst the titans and they clawed the elephants and those 
mounted upon them and the chariots from which the banners 
streamed, breaking them to pieces with their teeth. 
Full of fury, Lakshmana and Rama, with their arrows 
resembling venomous snakes pierced the foremost of the titans, 
both those who were visible and those who were invisible, and 
the dust rising from the hooves of the horses and the wheels 
of the chariots filled the ears and eyes of the combatants, whilst 
rivers of blood flowed in dreadful torrents in that ghastly tumult 
which caused the hair to stand on end. 
Meanwhile the sound of gongs and drums, marvellous to hear, 
joined to the blare of conches and the rattle of wheels, and a 
terrible clamour arose of horses neighing mingling with the 
cries of the wounded. The corpses of great monkeys, spears, 
maces and the bodies of the titans, who were able to change 
their form at will, lay in heaps as high as a mountain on the 
battlefield. And those weapons appeared to be offered up 
as a profusion of flowers by the earth, which was entirely hidden 
and rendered impassable by rivers of blood. That fatal night 
was as calamitous to the monkeys and titans as the night of 
dissolution wherein no being survives. 
Meanwhile the titans, aided by that impenetrable darkness, 
with great ferocity showered a hail of weapons on Rama and, 
yelling, advanced upon him in fury like the ocean at the time of 
the destruction of all creatures. And Rama, in the twinkling 
of an eye, with six shafts resembling tongues of Same struck 
down six titans — the indomitable Yajnashatru, Mahaparshwa, 
Mahodara, Vajradamshtra of colossal stature and the two 
emissaries, Shuka and Sarana. With his innumerable shafts, 
Rama thereafter pierced them all in their vital parts, so that 
under that shower of arrows they fled from the field, barely 
escaping with their lives. In an instant, that warrior of die 
great car tit up the cardinal points with his formidable missiles 
resembling tongues of fire so that every quarter became 
luminous. All those titans, who dared to challenge Rama, 
perished like moths in a flame, and those arrows, whose points 
were of fine gold, flying everywhere, illumined the night as do 
108 
YUDDHA KANDA 
the fireflies in autumn. The cries of the titans and the roll of 
drums increased the horrors of that night beyond imagining 
and, in that terrible uproar which re-echoed on every side, it 
seemed as if the Mount Trikuta was emitting confused murmurs 
from its innumerable caves. 
The gigantic Golangulas, black as night, crushed the rangers 
of the night in their arms in order to devour them and Angada 
destroyed his foes with savagery in the struggle. 
Then Indrajita, after that monkey had slain his steeds and 
charioteer, overcome with fatigue, made himself invisible and 
vanished. 
For this feat, Bali's son, worthy of being honoured, was 
lauded by the Gods and Rishis as also by the brothers, Rama 
and Lakshmana. All beings aware of the prowess of the mighty 
Indrajita in war, witnessing his discomfiture and, beholding 
that high-souled one, were elated and, in the height of joy, the 
monkeys with Sugriva and Bibishana, seeing the enemy's 
defeat, cried out " Excellent ! Excellent ! " 
Meanwhile Indrajita, who had been overcome in the duel 
with Bali's son of redoubtable deeds, was seized with violent 
wrath. Rendering himself invisible by virtue of the boon he 
had received from Brahma, that wicked wretch, who was 
exhausted by the fight, transported with anger, loosed some 
sharp arrows bright as lightning on Rama and Lakshmana. 
On die field of battle, in his rage, he pierced the limbs of those 
two Raghavas with formidable shafts resembling serpents. 
Enveloped by illusion, he sought to confuse them in the struggle 
and, invisible to all beings through his magic arts, that ranger 
of the night bound those two brothers Rama and Lakshmana 
with a network of arrows. Then the monkeys beheld the two 
warriors, those lions among men, enmeshed by the serpentine 
darts of that furious titan. Not being able to overcome those 
two princes in his manifest form, the son of the King of the 
Titans, in his perversity, had recourse to magic in order to make 
them captive. 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 45 
Rama and Lakshmana are struck doztm by Indrajita 
Anxious to ascertain what had become of Indrajita, Rama, 
that illustrious and mighty prince sent out ten monkey leaders 
in his pursuit ; the two sons of Sushena, the monkey, General 
Nila, Angada the son of Bah, the valiant Sharabha, Dvivida, 
Hanuman, the exceedingly courageous Sanuprastha, Rishabha 
and Rishabaskandha. 
Those monkeys flung themselves joyfully into the air 
brandishing huge trunks of trees in order to explore the ten 
regions, but Ravani1, by means of his arrows, loosed with force 
from the most excellent of bows, arrested their impetuous flight 
and those monkeys of terrific bounds, who were cruelly pierced 
by those shafts, were unable to discern Indrajita in the darkness, 
as the sun is obscured when veiled in cloud. With those darts, 
that lacerated the flesh, the titan transfixed Rama and Lakshmana 
and remained master of the field and there was no part of Rama 
or Lakshmana's body that was not pierced by those serpentine 
shafts so that streams of blood flowed from their gaping wounds, 
and they appeared like two Kimshuka Trees in flower. 
At that instant, his eyes inflamed, Ravana's son, who resembled 
a mass of collyrium mixed with oil, though still invisible, said 
to those two brothers : — " When I, making myself invisible, 
enter into combat, even the Chief of the Gods, Shakra himself, 
is not able to discern or approach me, how much less you two! 
O Descendants of Raghu, having imprisoned you in this network 
of plumed darts, I, yielding myself up to the violence of my 
wrath, am about to dispatch you to the region of Yama ! " 
Thus addressing those virtuous brothers, Rama and 
Lakshmana, he pierced them afresh with his pointed arrows 
shouting exultantly. 
Resembling a heap of antimony, the swarthy Indrajita, 
stretching his immense bow, let fly an even thicker shower of 
1 Ravani — Ravana's son, Indrajita. 
no 
YUDDHA KANDA 
formidable arrows in the fight. That warrior, who knew how to 
make his darts pierce Rama and Lakshmana's vital parts, set up 
a continual shouting and the two princes in the forefront of 
battle, imprisoned in the net of arrows and darts, in the twinkling 
of an eye, became incapable of distinguishing anything. Para lysed, pierced in their vital pans, exhausted, those two mighty 
and courageous archers fell to the earth, they who were her 
lords ! Lying on that heroes' bed, those two warriors, covered 
with blood, their limbs bristling with arrows, swooned away 
in their extremity. And there was not a hair's breadth on 
their bodies from the tips of their fingers to the end of their 
feet that was not lacerated, pricked and pierced by those 
irresistible darts and from both those warriors who had been 
struck down by that ferocious titan, able to change his shape 
at will, the hot blood gushed forth as water from a spring. 
And Rama fell first, his vital parts pierced by the shafts of the 
wrathful Indrajita, who had formerly vanquished Shakra, and 
Havana's son riddled Raghava's body with smooth and polished 
darts as thick as dust clouds. Naracas, Demi-naracas, Bhallas, 
Anjalis, Vatsadantas, Sinhadantas,1 and those shafts like unto 
razors fell on that warrior, who lay on the earth like a hero, 
allowing his golden bow, which was severed, to sink from his 
grasp. 
Beholding Rama, that lion among men, fall under a hail of 
arrows, Lakshmana gave up all hope of living and he was 
overcome by grief on beholding the lotus-eyed Rama, his refuge, 
who ever delighted in battle, lying on the earth. 
The monkeys too, witnessing this, suffered extreme distress 
and, their eyes full of tears, overcome with despair, emitted 
mournful cries ; and while those two warriors lay unconscious 
on that heroes' bed, the monkeys surrounded them and, 
assembling there, with the son of the Wind at their head, 
remained inconsolable and a prey to despair. 
1 Sea Glossary of weapons. 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 46 
The despair of Sugriva and his Army. Bibishana 
reassures him 
Meanwhile those inhabitants of the woods, surveying the earth 
and the sky, beheld the brothers, Rama and Lakshmana, covered 
with arrows and the titan resting, like unto Indra having loosed 
the rains. Accompanied by Sugriva, Bibishana, lamenting, 
came to that place in haste, and Nila, Dvivida, Mainda, Sushena, 
Kumuda, Angada and Hanuman approached, weeping for the 
sons of Raghu. 
Breathing but faintly, bathed in blood, riddled with in numerable darts, motionless, they lay stretched on a bed of 
arrows sighing like serpents, washed in blood, resembling two 
golden standards, and those warriors, lying on a hero's couch, 
were surrounded by monkey leaders whose eyes were suffused 
with tears. 
Beholding the two Raghavas pierced with darts, a profound 
emotion stirred those monkeys, who were accompanied by 
Bibishana, and they surveyed the four quarters without being 
able to discover Ravani, who had veiled himself in his magic 
during the fight. But while he was hidden by his occult 
power, Bibishana, also having recourse to magic arts, looking 
round, beheld his nephew of incomparable exploits, who was 
invincible in battle, standing nearby. Although that warrior, 
who had no peer in the field, had made himself invisible by 
virtue of the boon he had received, he was recognized by 
Bibishana, who was full of energy, glory and prowess. 
Indrajita, however, contemplating his own feat, gazed on 
those two warriors stretched on the earth and, in an excess of joy, 
wishing to share it with all the titans, said : — 
" Those two mighty brothers, Rama and Lakshmana, the 
slayers of Khara and Dushana, are now struck down by my 
darts ! Even were they aided by the Gods and Asuras with the 
YUDDHA KANDA 
hosts of Rishis, they would never be able to release themselves 
from those arrows that paralyse them ! I have overcome Rama 
for the sake of my sire, who is a prey to anxiety and fear, passing 
the three watches of the night without allowing his limbs to rest 
on his couch, I have subdued that wretch, who destroys all 
beings to their very root, on account of whom the whole of 
Lanka is agitated like a river in the rainy season. As clouds 
are dispersed in the autumn, so have the exploits of Rama and 
Lakshmana and all the inhabitants of the woods been rendered 
void." 
Having spoken thus to all the titans, who had witnessed the 
scene, Ravani began to assail all the monkey leaders. First he 
struck down Nila with nine exceedingly powerful javelins, 
thereafter he wounded Mainda and Dvivida with three more 
and that mighty bowman, having pierced Jambavan in the breast 
with an arrow, loosed ten shafts on the impetuous Hanuman. 
Then Ravani, in the fight, full of ire, with twin arrows pierced 
Gavaksha and Sharabha, those two of immeasurable prowess, 
and the leader of the Golangulas and the son of Bali, Angada, 
were overcome by innumerable darts by the swift-coursing 
Ravani. Transfixing the leading monkeys with shafts resembling 
tongues of fire, that mighty and colossal son of Ravana began 
to shout in triumph and, having overwhelmed and routed the 
monkeys with a hail of weapons, that long-armed hero burst into 
loud laughter, exclaining : — 
" Behold, O Titans, with a formidable net I have bound those 
two brothers in the presence of their forces ! " 
Thus did he speak and all those titans, versed in magic, were 
exceedingly delighted by his exploit and cheered him un animously with a roar like unto thunder, crying : — " Rama is 
dead ! " and hearing these tidings and beholding the two 
brothers, Rama and Lakshmana, lying on the earth without 
breath or movement, they all paid homage to Ravana's son, 
reflecting " They are slain ! " In a transport of joy, Indrajita, 
victorious in conflict, returned to Lanka spreading happiness 
among the Nairritas. 
A great fear however had taken possession of Sugriva, who 
was overcome with terror on beholding Rama and Lakshmana 
riddled with arrows and pierced in every limb and bone, 
"3 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
whereupon Bibishana said to the King of the Monkeys, who was 
afflicted, his face bathed in tears, his eyes wild with terror : — 
" Have no fear, O Sugriva, stay this rain of tears ; these are 
the fortunes of war ; the titan's victory is not assured ; fate may 
still smile upon us, O Warrior. These two heroes, full of prowess 
will recover from their swoon. Take courage and inspire me 
with courage also, who am bereft of a protector, O Monkey 1 
Death cannot strike terror in those who find their felicity in 
truth and justice." 
Thus speaking, Bibishana, dipping his hand in water, washed 
Sugriva's beautiful eyes and, after taking water and uttering a 
sacred formula, the virtuous Bibishana then dried the face of that 
intelligent King of the Monkeys and addressing him in words 
full of good sense and comfort, said : — 
" This is not the moment, O Greatest of Monkey Kings, to 
manifest agitation, excessive emotion in such a situation leads 
to death, therefore abandon this faint-heartedness that will 
prove thine undoing and consider how thou canst best serve the 
troops. Keep watch over Rama so long as he has not regained 
consciousness, for when they come to themselves, the two 
Kakutsthas will remove all fear from us. This is nothing to 
Rama nor is he dying, and Lakshmi1, who is inaccessible to those 
who are doomed, has not abandoned him. Therefore pluck 
up thy courage and call on thy prowess while I seek to inspire 
the ranks with renewed confidence. Those monkeys, their 
eyes dilated, trembling and discouraged by the rumours whis pered from ear to ear, on seeing me cheerfully going about 
amongst the ranks of the army, will abandon their fears like a 
discarded garland, O King of the Monkeys ! " 
Having reassured Sugriva, that Indra among the Titans, 
Bibishana, passed through the monkey lines reviving their 
confidence. 
Meanwhile Indrajita, that great magician, surrounded by all 
his forces re-entered the City of Lanka and sought out his sire. 
Approaching Ravana, with joined palms, he imparted the 
pleasant tidings to him, saying : — 
" Rama and Lakshmana are slain ! " Then Ravana joyfully 
springing up in the midst of the titans, on hearing that bis two 
1 Goddess of prosperity. 
»4 
YUDDHA KANDA 
enemies had succumbed, smelt the head of his son and in great 
delight questioned him concerning the matter. 
Being interrogated by his sire regarding what had taken place, 
Indrajita related how the two brothers, bound by his shafts, were 
lying without strength or movement. On hearing those tidings 
from that warrior of the great car, joy flooded Ravana's inmost 
being and Dashagriva, banishing his fears regarding the son of 
Dasaratha, warmly felicitated his offspring who stood beside him. 
CHAPTER 47 
Sita sees Rama and Lakshmana lying on the Battlefield 
The son of Ravana having returned to Lanka, his purpose 
accomplished, the leading monkeys surrounded Raghava in 
order to watch over him, and Hanuman, Angada, Nila, Sushena, 
Kumuda, Nala, Gaja, Gavaksha, Panasa, Sanuprastha and the 
mighty Jambavan with Sunda, Rambha, Shatabali and Prithu, 
having re-organized their ranks, alert, armed with trees 
surveyed the quarters of the sky up and down and on every side 
and, even if a grass stirred, they exclaimed " It is a titan ! " 
Ravana, meanwhile, full of joy dismissed bis son Indrajita 
and thereafter summoned the female titans who guarded Sita 
and they with Trijata, having hastened there at bis command, 
were addressed by that monarch in his delight who said to 
them: — 
" Inform Vaidehi that Indrajita has slain Rama and 
Lakshmana ! Compel her to enter the Pushpaka Plane and 
show them to her lying on the field of battle ! Her consort, 
the One depending on whom rendered her so proud that she 
refused to be united with me, lies there struck down with 
his brother in the presence of bis army ! From now on, free 
from anxiety, grief and expectation of re-union, Maithili, 
adorned in all her jewels, will submit herself to me. To-day, 
beholding Rama with Lakshmana fallen under the sway of 
death on the battlefield, seeing no other haven and hoping 
for nought else, the large-eyed Sita will voluntarily seek refuge 
with me 1 " 
«5 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
At these words of that wicked monarch, they all replied — 
" Be it so ! " and went to where the Pushpaka Chariot was, 
thereafter ascending it. Taking that aerial car, the female 
titans, in obedience to Ravana's behests, rejoined Maithili in 
the Ashoka Grove. 
There they found her overcome with the grief that separation 
from her lord caused her, nevertheless they placed her in the 
Chariot Pushpaka and when they were seated therein with 
Trijata, Ravana took her round the city garlanded with flags 
and banners and at the same time the delighted Monarch of 
the Titans caused a proclamation to be made in Lanka announcing 
that Rama as also Lakshmana had been slain by Indrajita in 
combat. 
Sita, transported with Trijata in that car, beheld the monkey 
troops who had been slain and witnessed the joy exhibited by 
those eaters of flesh and the monkeys afflicted with grief standing 
round Rama and Lakshmana. And she beheld those two 
warriors also, lying pierced with arrows, unconscious, riddled 
with weapons, their armour shattered, their bows broken, 
transfixed by darts. Those two brothers, who were filled with 
valour, the foremost of heroes were lying stretched on the earth 
resembling two youthful sons of Pavaka. 
And when the unfortunate Maithili beheld those two intrepid 
lions among men, pierced with spears, she broke into piteous 
lamentations, and the dark-eyed Sita, the daughter of janaka, 
of faultless limbs, beholding her lord and Lakshmana lying on 
the earth, burst into sobs. Exhausted with weeping and grief 
on seeing those two brothers resembling the offspring of the 
Gods and, believing them to be dead, overwhelmed with 
affliction, she spoke thus ;— 
CHAPTER 48 
Sita's Lamentations 
Seeing her lord lying on the earth as also the valiant Lakshmana, 
Sita, in the grief that overwhelmed her, gave voice to her 
complaint, saying : — 
116 
YUDDHA KANDA 
"The soothsayers, reading the lineaments of my body, 
prophesized thus : — 
* Thou shalt bear sons and never be widowed ! ' — now that 
Rama has been slain, their words have proved to be untrue ! 
Since Rama is slain, those who predicted that I should be the 
companion and consort of the performer of great sacrifices, 
have uttered a falsehood ! Now that Rama has been slain, 
those soothsayers, who told me I should be highly honoured by 
the wives of warriors and kings, are proved not to have spoken 
truly ! Now that Rama has been slain, the astrologers among 
the brahmins, who openly foretold happiness for me, are proved 
to have spoken falsely ! 
" Yet I bear the marks of the lotus on my feet by which 
high-born women receive the supreme consecration with their 
lords at their coronation nor do I find in myself any marks of 
ill-fortune which betoken widowhood in those who are ill starred, yet all the auspicious signs appear to be rendered void 
for me ! These marks of the lotus, said to be of good augury by 
the Pundits, have no meaning for me, now that Rama is slain ! 
" My locks are fine, of even length and dark, my eyebrows 
meet, my legs are round and smooth, my teeth evenly separated, 
the corners of my eyes are shaped like the conch, my breasts, 
bands, feet and thighs well proportioned, my nails smooth and 
polished, my fingers well-shaped, my breasts touch each other 
and have depressed nipples, my navel too is deeply indented, my 
bosom well-formed, my complexion has the sheen of a pearl, 
the down on my skin is soft. It is said I possess the twelve 
auspicious signs : my feet and hands are without hollows and 
marked with the barley corn1 and my smile is langorous. Thus 
did those, who interpret the marks of youthful maidens, speak 
of me. 
" Having purified Janasthana8, received the tidings of my 
fate and crossed the impassable ocean, those two brothers have 
perished in the imprint of a cow's hoof. Did they not recollect 
(that they possessed) the arrows of Varuna, Agni, Indra and 
Vayu, as also the Brahmashira weapon ? 
1 A natural line crossing the thumb at the second joist resembling a barley 
corn, which is considered auspicious. 
* Purified Janasthana — that is — ' Rid Janasthana of the titans '. 
i H7 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
" By means of magic arts, an invisible foe has slain those two, 
Rama and Lakshmana, my protectors, who are equal to Vasava 
in combat and I am now bereft of any support. Nay, if he had 
come into Rama's presence, he would not have returned alive 
even were he possessed of the swiftness of thought but since 
Rama and his brother are lying struck down on the battlefield, 
there is no burden too heavy for death to shoulder ! Fate is 
inexorable. I do not weep so much for Rama and Lakshmana 
or for myself or my mother but for my unfortunate mother-in law, Kaushalya, who dwells constantly on her son's return after 
fulfilling his vows, she who asks herself, * When shall I behold 
Lakshmana and Sita with Raghava once more ? * " 
Thus did Janaki lament and Trijata said to her : — " Do not 
despair, O Goddess, thy lord lives ! I will tell thee what 
powerful considerations have convinced me that those two 
brothers, Rama and Lakshmana still live, O Queen. They are, 
that resolution and martial ardour do not animate the faces of 
soldiers who have lost their leader, neither would the celestial 
car, Pushpaka, have brought thee hither, O Vaidehi, if those two 
heroes had succumbed. An army that sees its valiant commander 
fall is bereft of courage and wanders aimlessly about on tile 
battlefield like a ship which has lost its rudder. Yet there is 
neither confusion nor disorder among the intrepid forces that 
mount guard over the two Kakutsthas. I am pointing this out 
to thee on account of mine affection for thee. These auspicious 
omens should re-assure thee fully, for know well, the two 
Kakutsthas are not dead, I hasten to tell thee this out of love 
for thee. 
" I have never spoken what is not true to thee nor shall I 
ever do so, O Maithili, for by thy conduct and natural gaiety 
thou hast found a place in my heart ! Nay, those two warriors 
are not able to be vanquished even by the Gods and Asuras 
with their leaders. This is what I have observed and com municate to thee. Yea, there is a great marvel to be seen, O 
Maithili ; behold how, fallen under those shafts and deprived 
of their senses, their beauty has not deserted them. 
" In the natural course, when men have lost their lives, their 
features exhibit appalling alteration, it is therefore impossible 
that these two do not still live. Banish thy grief on account of 
nS 
YUDDHA KANDA 
Rama and Lakshmana, abandon thy sorrow, O Daughter of 
Janaka ! " 
At these words, Sita, who resembled a daughter of the Gods, 
with joined palms, exclaimed " May it be so ! " 
Meanwhile the Chariot Pushpaka, swift as the wind, had 
returned and the plaintive Sita re-entered the city with Trijata, 
whereupon descending from the car, she entered the Ashoka 
Grove with the female titans. 
Having returned to the royal enclosure planted with in numerable trees, Sita, recalling the two princes whom she had 
just seen, became a prey to extreme grief. 
chapter 49 
Rama returns to consciousness and weeps over Lakshmana 
Bound by those formidable weapons, the two sons of Dasaratha, 
breathing like serpents, lay bleeding on the earth. 
Those foremost of monkeys, the valiant companions of 
Sugriva, plunged in grief, were all standing round the two 
illustrious warriors. 
Then the mighty Raghava, by virtue of his hardihood and 
native strength, awoke from his swoon despite the shafts that 
held him captive. Beholding his brother bleeding, unconscious, 
tightly bound and his features changed, Rama, full of grief, 
lamented thus : — " Of what use to me is the recovery of Sita 
or even life itself, since my brother, now lying before mine eyes, 
has been struck down in the fight ? It were possible for me to 
find a consort equal to Sita in this world of mortals but not a 
brother, friend and comrade in arms such as Lakshmana ! 
If he has returned to the five elements, he, the increaser of 
Sumitra's joy, I will yield up my life breaths in the presence of 
the monkeys ! 
" What shall I say to my mother, Kaushalya, or to Kaikeyi ? 
If I return without Lakshmana, how shall I console Sumitra 
trembling and crying out like an osprey, who sighs for her son's 
return from whom she has been separated so long? What 
119 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
answer shall I give to Shatrughna and the illustrious Bharata 
when I return without the one who followed me to the forest ? 
Nay, I should not be able to endure Sumitra's reproaches ; 
I will leave my body here ; I am unable to continue living. Woe 
unto me and to my lack of nobility, since, through my fault, 
Lakshmana has fallen and lies on a bed of arrows as one who has 
yielded up his life ! 
" O Lakshmana, thou didst ever console me in my great 
misfortune ; now that thou art slain, thou wilt no longer be able 
to allay my sufferings by thy words. Thou, who, in this battle, 
struck down innumerable titans, art fallen, pierced by darts, 
like a hero on the selfsame field. Lying on a bed of arrows, 
bathed in blood, thou art nought but a heap of weapons ! It 
appears as if the sun has set behind the Astachala Mountains ! 
Pierced with spears, thy limbs express thine agony without the 
aid of words. I shall follow that illustrious warrior to the region 
of Yama, as he accompanied me when I retired to the forest ; 
he, who ever loved his own and was filled with devotion for me, 
lies in the state to which my misdeeds have brought him, wretch 
that I am ! 
" Even when deeply provoked, that valiant hero never uttered 
an unpleasant or harsh word ; he who was able to loose five 
hundred arrows in one shot and who excelled Kartavirya 
himself in the science of archery ; Lakshmana, who was 
accustomed to a rich couch and who, with his arrows could 
sever those of the mighty Shakra, is lying slain on the earth. 
" Those vain words, which I uttered, will undoubtedly 
consume me since I have not enthroned Bibishana as King of 
the Titans ! Return at once, O Sugriva, since bereft of my 
support thou and thy leaders will be overcome by Ravana. 
Recross the sea accompanied by thine army led by Angada with 
Nila and Nala, O King. I am fully satisfied by the great 
military exploit of Hanuman, impossible to any other and by that 
accomplished by the King of the Bears and the General of the 
Golangulas. That which Angada, Mainda and Dvivida did, 
the terrible combat that Kesarin and Sampati sustained, the 
formidable struggle in which Gavaya, Gavaksha, Sharabha, 
Gaja and other monkeys, who are willing to sacrifice their lives 
for me, took part, are sufficient for me. Nay, it is not possible 
YUDDHA KANDA 
for mortals to avoid their destiny. O Sugriva, tearing to fail 
in thy duty, thou hast done all that a friend and comrade could 
do ; all that is due to friendship, thou hast accomplished, O 
Foremost of Monkeys ! I take leave of you all ; go where 
it seems best to you ! " 
Hearing Rama lament thus, the monkeys allowed tears to fall 
from their reddened eyes, when, at that moment, Bibishana, 
having established order in the ranks, mace in hand hurried to 
rejoin Raghava. Seeing him, who resembled a mass of collyrium, 
hastening towards them thus, the monkeys thinking him to be 
Ravani, tied away. 
chaptsr 50 
Garuda liberates Rama and Lakshmana 
Meanwhile the illustrious and powerful King of the Monkeys 
enquired saying : — " What does this stampede signify ? The 
army resembles a ship amidst the waves struck by a tempest ! " 
Hearing Sugriva's speech, Angada, the son of Bali, answered : 
" Dost thou not see Rama and Lakshmana of the Great Car, 
those two valiant and illustrious sons of Dasaratha, covered with 
darts lying all bloody on a bed of arrows ? " 
Thereupon that Indra among monkeys, Sugriva, said to his 
son : — " To my mind there is some other cause why the monkeys, 
bewildered, their eyes distended with terror, are throwing down 
their arms in order to flee in all directions without shame and 
without looking behind them, jostling each other and leaping 
over those who have fallen 1 " 
In the midst of this turmoil, the warrior Bibishana came there, 
a great mace in his hand and said " Victory to Rama ! Victory 
to Rama !" and Sugriva observed that it was this titan who had 
caused the panic among the monkeys whereat he addressed the 
illustrious King of the Bears, who stood near, and said : — 
" It is Bibishana who has come hither ! On seeing him the 
monkeys, seized with terror, have fled, deeming him to be 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Havana's son ; do thou rally those fugitives immediately, who, 
in fear, have scattered in all directions and inform them that it is 
Bibishana who has come ! " 
In obedience to Sugriva's command, Jambavan perceiving 
it to be Bibishana and recognizing his voice, re-assured the 
monkeys and arrested the stampede, whereupon freed from 
anxiety they all retraced their steps. 
Meanwhile the faithful Bibishana, on beholding Rama's body 
as also Lakshmana's covered with arrows, was overcome with 
distress in his turn. Dipping his hand in water, he washed their 
eyes, but, anguish seizing his heart, he began to weep and 
lament, saying : — 
" Behold to what a pass these two powerful and valiant 
warriors have been brought by that titan with his crafty ways ! 
The son of my brother, that wicked youth of perverse soul, 
in his demoniacal cunning, has deceived those two honourable 
fighters. Pierced by arrows, covered with blood, they are 
lying on the earth like two porcupines. Those two gallant 
beings, those two lions among men, on whom depended the 
position to which I aspired, to my destruction are lying here 
insensible. I am as one dead and, deprived of the hope of 
becoming king am lost, whilst my rival Ravana sees his vow 
fulfilled and his desires realised ! " 
Thus did Bibishana lament, whereupon Sugriva embraced 
him and that magnanimous King of the Monkeys spoke to him 
in this wise : — 
" O Virtuous Prince, thou shalt certainly reign over Lanka ; 
Ravana and his son will not achieve their purpose ; the injury 
done to Rama and Lakshmana is not grave, they will both 
emerge from their swoon and destroy Ravana and his hordes 
in battle. " 
When he had thus consoled and comforted the titan, Sugriva 
issued his commands to Sushena, his stepfather, who stood 
before him, saying : — 
" Take these two brothers, Rama and Lakshmana with the 
foremost of the monkey divisions to Kishkindha, till these two 
scourgers of their foes have recovered consciousness. As for 
me, I shall slay Ravana with his son and his relatives and bring 
back Maithili as did Shakra the prosperity he had lost." 
YUDDHA KANDA 
Thus did that King of the Monkeys speak and Sushena 
answered him saying : — 
" Formerly a great war took place between the Devas and 
Asuras and, by making themselves invisible again and again, 
the Danavas overcame the Gods despite their skill in bearing 
arms. Experienced warriors though they were, wounded, 
unconscious and almost deprived of life, yet Brihaspati revived 
them by the aid of remedies accompanied by the recitation of 
sacred formulas. 
" Let the monkeys, Sampari, Fanasa and others go in haste 
to gather those simples by the ocean of milk ; undoubtedly 
those monkeys are conversant with the two mountain herbs, 
the celestial Samjivakarana and Vishalya, which were created 
by a God. From the bosom of the milky ocean rise the 
Mountains Chandra and Drona, where the divine * Amrita ' 
emerged after the churning,1 it is there that these miraculous 
herbs are to be found. Let the Son of the Wind, Hanuman go 
to those two mountains placed in that vast sea by the Gods." 
As he was speaking, a great wind arose accompanied by 
massed clouds and lightning, whipping up the salty waves and 
causing the mountains to tremble as from an earthquake. Under 
the mighty stroke of Vata's wing the great trees fell headlong 
into the briny waters of the sea, their branches broken, whilst 
terror seized the great snakes who inhabited these regions 
and those monsters plunged into the depths. 
Suddenly Garuda, the valiant son of Vinata like unto a blazing 
torch appeared to all those monkeys and, on beholding him, 
the serpents who bound those two warriors in the form of 
mighty arrows, Med away. Thereafter Suparna, touching the 
two Kakutsthas and offering them his good wishes, with his 
hands wiped their faces that shone like the moon. 
Under Vainateya's touch, the wounds of both were closed and 
their bodies immediately assumed a brilliant and glowing hue. 
Their valour, vigour, strength, endurance and resolution, those 
great qualities, also perspicacity, intelligence and memory were 
redoubled. 
Having raised up those equals of Vasava, the exceedingly 
valiant Garuda embraced them warmly and Rama said to him : — 
1 Referring to the churning of the Ocean by Gods and Asuras. 
123 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
" Thanks to thy beneficence and grace we have both been 
delivered from the strange evil that Ravana brought upon us and 
our strength has returned. As in the presence of my father 
Dasaratha, or my grandfather Aja, in thy presence also my 
heart is filled with felicity. Who art thou endowed with a 
beauty which distinguishes thee, thou bearing crowns, divine 
perfumes and celestial ornaments, the raiment which clothes 
thee being free from dust ? " 
Then the extremely illustrious Vainateya, who was full of 
valour and the Lord of Winged Creatures, his heart enraptured, 
addressed Rama, whose eyes sparkled with delight, and said : — 
" I am thy dear friend, O Kakutstha, thy very breath, Garuda, 
who have come hither to assist you both. The mighty Asuras 
and exceedingly energetic monkeys as also the Gandharvas 
with Shatakratu at their head or the Gods themselves would not 
have been able to sever these formidable bonds wrought with 
arrows, woven with the aid of great magic by Indrajita of 
ruthless deeds. These offspring of Kadru of sharp fangs and 
subtle poison, which the potent arts of the titan had changed 
to arrows, had fettered thee. Fortunate art thou, O Virtuous 
Rama, thou true hero, as also Lakshmana, thy brother, the 
destroyer of his foes in combat. 
Hearing of thy plight, summoning up mine energy in 
affection for you both, giving ear to the call of friendship alone, 
I came hither with all speed. Now that you are liberated from 
these formidable bonds let both of you be constantly on your 
guard ! All titans by nature have recourse to treachery in war, 
whilst for you, O Chivalrous Warriors, honour is your only 
weapon. Never trust the titans on the battlefield for such 
perfidious means are ever employed by them." 
Having counselled him in this wise, the mighty Suparna 
embraced Rama tenderly and craved his permission to depart, 
saying : — 
" Dear and Virtuous Raghava, thou art a friend to thy foes, 
allow me to take my leave. Do not enquire indiscreetly into the 
cause of my friendship, O Raghava, who am as near to thee as 
thy breath, though external to thee. Thou sbalt know of it when 
thou hast achieved success in battle, O Hero ! When, under the 
rain of thy missiles, Lanka has been destroyed save for the aged 
124 
YUDDHA KANDA 
and the children and thou hast slain Ravana, thine adversary, 
thou shalt bring back Sita ! " 
Having said this, Suparna of swift flight, who had just healed 
Rama's wounds in the presence of the monkeys, having paid 
obeisance to him and taken him into his arms, mounted into 
the sky with the speed of the wind. 
Seeing the two Raghavas healed of their wounds, the leaders 
of the monkeys, lashing their tails, roared like lions. Thereafter 
gongs were beaten and drums resounded, whilst conches were 
blown amidst general rejoicing. Some manifested their strength 
by breaking down the trees which they used as maces and, in their 
warlike frenzy, those Plavamgamas hurled themselves on the 
gates of Lanka. 
Thereafter a terrible and appalling clamour arose amongst the 
foremost of monkeys as, at the end of summer, the roaring of 
thunderclouds in the night. 
CHAPTER 5 I 
Dhumraksha goes out to fight the Monkeys 
That formidable clamour, set up by the monkeys who were 
full of martial ardour, arrested the attention of Ravana and his 
titans, and he, hearing the joyful and spirited acclamations and 
the distant tumult, said to his ministers who surrounded him : — 
" A great uproar, resembling the muttering of clouds, has 
arisen from that horde of delighted monkeys. Undoubtedly 
their joy is great, their mighty shouts are agitating the ocean 
itself. Nevertheless whetted shafts have rendered the two 
brothers, Rama and Lakshmana, insensible, therefore this 
tremendous outcry almost alarms me ! " 
Having spoken thus to his ministers, the Lord of the Titans 
said to his Nairritas, who stood round him : — 
" Do ye speedily discover from what cause this general 
rejoicing among those forest dwellers proceeds in their present 
painful situation ! " 
At this command, the titans hastily climbed the ramparts 
125 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
from where they beheld the army and its leader the illustrious 
Sugriva with the two Raghavas also, freed of their bonds, seated 
in noble ease, whereupon the titans were thunderstruck. With 
terror in their hearts, those fierce warriors jumped down from 
the walls and, deadly pale, returned to their king. With 
downcast mien, those titans, skilled in speech, faithfully 
informed Ravana of those unpleasant tidings, saying : — 
" The two brothers, Rama and Lakshmana, whom Indrajita 
had bound with his benumbing shafts and whose arms he had 
pinioned, are freed from the arrows which paralysed them and 
now appear on the field of battle in theirnative vigour, resembling 
two elephants who have snapped their fetters." 
At these words, the powerful King of the Titans, full of 
anxiety and highly incensed, grew pale and said : — 
" If mine adversaries, having thus been bound, are now free 
despite those formidable arrows, those rare boons resembling 
serpents bright as the sun, that were infallible and with which 
Indrajita secured them after overcoming them in combat, then 
mine entire authority is in jeopardy ! Verily those darts, bright 
as fire, which in battle deprived mine enemies of life have been 
rendered void." 
Having uttered these words in furious tones, hissing like a 
snake, he addressed one named Dhumraksha who was seated 
amidst the titans and said : — 
" Taking with thee a considerable force of titans go without 
delay and slay Rama and Lakshmana." 
At the command of that crafty monarch, Dhumraksha 
circumambulated him and immediately left the palace, thereafter 
having crossed the threshold he said to the General of the Forces: 
" Mobilize the army, what need is there for delay when the 
battle is joined ! " 
Thus spoke Dhumraksha and the General gathered together 
a large number of troops in accord with Ravana's command. 
Thereafter those prowlers of the night, who were valiant 
and of a formidable aspect, with girdles of bells round 
their waists, shouted exultantly and ranged themselves round 
Dhumraksha. 
Furnished with every kind of weapon, brandishing spears, 
hammers, maces, harpoons, sticks, iron cudgels, bars, hooks, 
126 
YUDDHA KANDA 
picks, nooses and axes, those terrible titans sallied forth with the 
noise of thunder. Clad in mail and mounted on chariots that 
were magnificently dressed with flags and decorated with bands 
of pure gold, harnessed to mules of many heads or steeds of 
exceeding fleetness or elephants maddened with Mada juice, 
some of those titans bounded forward like veritable tigers. 
And Dhumraksha, with a great clatter set out in a celestial 
car to which mules with golden harness and the heads of deer 
and lions were hitched ; and that valiant general surrounded by 
the titans set forth amidst mocking laughter through the 
western gate, where Hanuman was stationed. As he advanced 
in his excellent car harnessed to mules, whose voices he emulated, 
birds of ill-omen planed above him and on the top of his chariot 
a terrible vulture alighted while those devourers of corpses 
clustered on the point of his standard. Streaming with blood 
a huge decapitated and livid trunk fell to earth emitting in articulate cries at Dhumraksha's approach and the sky rained 
down blood, the earth shook, the wind blew adversely with the 
roar of thunder and darkness obscured every quarter. 
Beholding those terrible portents that appeared in all their 
horror, boding ill-fortune to the titans, Dhumraksha was filled 
with alarm, and terror seized all the soldiers who accompanied 
him. At the moment when, full of fear, amidst his coundess 
titans, eager to enter into combat, that valiant general set out, 
he beheld the vast army of the monkeys resembling a great 
flood, protected by the arms of the Raghavas. 
chapter 52 
Dhumraksha Jights and is slain by Hanuman 
Seeing Dhumraksha of redoubtable courage set forth, all the 
monkeys in their martial ardour emitted loud cries and a terrific 
struggle ensued between those forest dwellers and the titans, 
who attacked each other with huge trees, spears and maces. 
On all sides ferocious monkeys were massacred by titans and 
titans felled to the earth by monkeys employing trees. The 
"7 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
titans struck their opponents with pointed arrows furnished 
with heron's plumes, fearful to behold, which never missed 
their target and terrible maces, harpoons, axes, formidable bars 
and tridents of all kinds, which, brandished by them, mutilated 
those powerful monkeys, while they, exasperated, redoubled 
their efforts and, without flagging, continued the fight. Their 
limbs pierced with arrows, their bodies transfixed with spears, 
those foremost of the monkeys armed themselves with trees 
and rocks and, with terrific bounds, having proclaimed their 
names to the accompaniment of yells, crushed those intrepid 
titans. 
Thereafter the battle waxed exceedingly furious between 
monkeys and demons and the former amidst shouts of triumph 
seized hold of stones of every kind and trees with countless 
branches and rocks in order to destroy the enemy ; the titans, 
who fed on gore, fell in heaps, vomiting blood, their sides 
slashed open by the trees, whilst others were crushed by the 
stones and yet others torn to pieces by the monkeys' teeth. 
Their standards broken, their swords snapped, their chariots 
overturned, they wandered about blindly and the earth was 
covered with the corpses of great elephants resembling hills and 
horses with their riders crushed by the great rocks hurled on 
them by those dwellers in the woods ; and the monkeys of 
exceeding valour rushed on the titans, flinging themselves upon 
them with gTeat bounds and scratching their races with their 
sharp nails. 
Mutilated, their hair torn out, maddened by the smell of 
blood, the titans fell in great numbers ; some of those fierce 
warriors however, in a paroxysm of fury hurled themselves 
on the monkeys and struck them with the palms of their hands, 
which resounded like the clap of thunder, and the monkeys, 
receiving that sharp shock, with an even greater ferocity crushed 
the titans with blows of their feet, teeth and trees. 
Seeing his army routed, Dhumraksha, that Hon among the 
titans, in his rage, began to create carnage among those bellicose 
apes and some pierced with spears lost rivers of blood whilst 
others, struck down by the blows of the axe, fell to earth. 
Here some were crushed by iron bars, others torn by harpoons 
or pierced by javelins, stumbled and fell, yielding up their vital 
138 
YUDDHA KANDA 
breaths. Mowed down, covered with blood, put to flight, 
those inhabitants of the woods fell dying under the furious 
onslaught of the titans in the struggle. Their breasts torn open 
they lay on their side or, slashed with tridents, their entrails 
gushed forth. 
Then that mighty conflict took on fearful proportions by 
virtue of the number of monkeys and titans who took part and 
the innumerable darts, stones and trees that were used. With 
the bowstrings as the tuneful lute, the neighing of the horses, 
the clapping of the hands and the trumpeting of the elephants 
as the melody, the whole battle resembled a symphony. 
Meanwhile Dhumraksha, armed with his bow, in the forefront 
of battle, under a hail of missiles, dispersed the monkeys as in 
sport on every side, and Maruti, beholding the monkey army 
being exterminated and put to flight by that titan, hurled himself 
upon him in fury, a great rock in his hand. His eyes inflamed 
with anger, the equal of his sire in courage, he flung the rock on 
the chariot of his foe and seeing the stone fall, Dhumraksha, 
brandishing his mace, in his agitation leapt quickly from the 
car to the ground. Then that rock rolled on the earth, having 
shattered the chariot with its wheels, its pole, its shafts, banner 
and Dhumraksha's bow. 
Thereafter Hanuman, born of Maruta, leaving the car lying, 
slew the titans with die trunks of trees furnished with their 
branches, and their heads crushed, covered with blood, mangled 
by those trees, they fell to the earth. 
Having routed the army of the enemy, Hanuman, born of 
Maruta, breaking off the peak of a mountain hurled himself on 
Dhumraksha, who, brandishing his mace, rushed on his 
adversary and he advanced with haste towards him shouting. 
Then Dhumraksha, in his rage, brought down that weapon 
studded with countless points on the head of the infuriated 
Hanuman and assailed by that violent and fearful stroke, the 
monkey, who was endowed with the strength of Maruta, was 
in no wise disturbed but struck the titan full on the skull with 
his rocky peak which shattered all his limbs, whereupon 
Dhumraksha suddenly fell to the earth like a mountain 
crumbling. 
Beholding him slain, the night-rangers who had survived the 
129 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
slaughter, terrified, re-entered Lanka, harassed by the 
Plavamgamas. 
The Illustrious son of Pavana, however, having destroyed 
his enemies, causing rivers of blood to flow, weary of slaughter, 
with delight received the cordial felicitations of the monkey 
leaders. 
chapter 53 
Vajradamshtra enters the Lists 
Hearing of the death of Dhumraksha, Ravana the King of the 
Titans fell into a transport of fury and began to hiss like a 
serpent. Wrought up with ire, with long and burning sighs 
he addressed the exceedingly powerful Vajradamshtra, saying : — 
" O Warrior, go forth at the head of the titans and triumph 
over the son of Dasaratha, Rama, as also over Sugriva and the 
monkeys ! " 
" Be it so ! " answered the general who was versed in the art 
of magic, and he departed speedily with the innumerable 
divisions that surrounded him. 
With the utmost care he assembled teams of elephants, horses, 
donkeys and mules, adorning them with countless flags of 
different colours, and that titan, wearing bracelets and a diadem 
of great price, set out immediately, bearing his bow and, having 
circumambulated his chariot dressed with pennants, which 
dazzled the gaze with its facings of pure gold, he ascended it. 
Thereafter infantry of every kind issued forth, furnished with 
weapons, such as cutlasses, innumerable darts, gleaming maces, 
harpoons, bows, lances, spears, swords, discus, hammers and 
sharp axes. All those illustrious lions among the titans in their 
resplendent and many-coloured uniforms, full of ardour 
mounted on elephants intoxicated with ichor, resembled 
moving hills. Their mounts equipped for combat, driven by 
mahouts bearing lances and goads, were headed by those 
distinguished for their trappings and great strength. 
And the whole army of titans filed out, looking as brilliant 
as the clouds riven by lightning in the rainy season and they 
130 
YUDDHA KANDA 
emerged from the northern gate where the General Angada was 
stationed. 
Thereafter, as they set forth, fearful portents appeared and, 
from a cloudless yet burning sky, meteors fell while jackals, 
emitting fearful howls, belched forth flames and fire. Hideous 
beasts foretold the destruction of the titans who entered into the 
combat stumbling miserably. 
Yet despite those ill-omens, the mighty Vajradamshtra, full 
of energy and prowess, went forward eager to meet the foe and, 
seeing their adversaries advancing, the monkeys, burning for 
victory, set up tremendous shouts which echoed in every quarter. 
Thereafter a furious struggle ensued between the monkeys and 
the titans and those redoubtable warriors of ferocious aspect 
sought to bring about each other's destruction. Some of those 
warriors, their heads and bodies severed, fell to the earth bathed 
in blood, whilst others, whose arms resembled steel, approached 
one another, attacking with various weapons, neither giving 
ground. Trees, stones and javelins clashed with a tremendous 
noise, striking terror in the heart of the listeners and the appalling 
clatter of chariot wheels, the twanging of bow-strings, the blare 
of trumpets, the roll of drums, the booming of gongs, created an 
indescribable uproar. 
Then, throwing away their weapons, they wrestled with 
one another in hand-to-hand combat, striking each other with 
the palms of their hands, their feet, their knees and even with 
trees. Some of the titans had their bodies torn open, some were 
crushed by rocks and some were beaten down by the blows of 
the monkeys in the fight. 
Now Vajradamshtra, having surveyed the scene, began to sow 
terror among the monkeys, as Antaka, noose in hand, at the 
destruction of the worlds. 
Full of vigour, those skilled warriors, the titans, transported 
with rage, decimated the monkey forces with every kind of 
weapon and, on his side the audacious son of Vayu struck 
down all those titans in the fight, fury re-doubling his strength, 
so that he appeared like the Fire of Dissolution. Then the 
valiant Angada, the equal of Shakra in valour, brandishing a 
tree, his eyes red with anger, like a lion amidst defenceless deer, 
caused a terrible carnage. By the force of his blows, the titans 
131 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
of redoubtable courage, their skulls crushed, fell like trees 
under the blows of the axe and the earth, strewn with chariots 
of every kind, standards, horses, bodies of monkeys and titans 
and rivers of blood, was fearful to behold. Strings of pearls, 
bracelets, raiment, and parasols decorated the battlefield, which 
glowed like an autumnal night and the tempestuous Angada 
scattered the great army of the titans as the wind dispels the 
clouds. 
chapter 54 
Angada slays Vajradamshtra 
The extermination of his army through Angada' s prowess filled 
the valiant Vajradamshtra with fury. Stretching his formidable 
bow, like unto Shakra's thunderbolt, he assailed the monkey 
battalions with a hail of shafts whereupon the foremost of the 
titans mounted on chariots, armed with every kind of weapon 
and full of courage, entered the lists whilst the monkeys, those 
powerful bulls among the Plavagas, assembling on all sides, 
fought with rocks. 
Thousands of weapons were hurled in that desperate encounter 
by the titan and monkey leaders and, from their side, the great 
monkeys with the ardour of elephants in rut, showered down 
giant trees and huge lumps of rock on the demons so that between 
those intrepid warriors, the titans and the monkeys, who never 
retreated in battle, a tremendous struggle ensued. 
Monkeys and titans, still possessing heads but bereft of arms 
and legs, lay on the earth bathed in blood and bristling with 
arrows, a prey to herons, vultures and crows or devoured by 
troops of jackals. 
Monkeys and night-rangers fell on the battlefield ; headless 
trunks leapt up to the terror of all, their arms, hands and heads 
severed and their limbs hacked to pieces in the fight. 
Meanwhile the army of Vajradamshtra, overcome by the 
monkeys, broke up under his eyes, whereupon that leader, seeing 
the titans terrorised and decimated by the Plavamgamas, his 
eyes red with anger, bow in hand, penetrated the enemy ranks, 
13a 
YUDDHA KANDA 
sowing panic amongst them. Thereafter he dispatched those 
monkeys with arrows furnished with heron's plumes that flew 
straight to their target and pierced seven, eight, nine or five 
of his opponents simultaneously, thus destroying them in his 
fury. Put to flight, those simian battalions, their limbs crippled 
by those darts, sought refuge with Angada as all creatures with 
Prajapati ; and when he beheld those monkey divisions fleeing 
in disorder, the son of Bali exchanged glances of hatred with 
Vajradamshtra and, in a paroxysm of rage, they entered into a 
terrible duel one with the other so that it seemed a Hon and an 
elephant intoxicated with ichor fought together. And the son 
of Bali full of valour, was struck in his vital parts by a hundred 
thousand arrows resembling tongues of fire and all his limbs were 
besprinkled with blood. Then that exceedingly energetic 
monkey of redoubtable courage hurled a tree at Vajradamshtra 
but that intrepid titan, seeing it fall, cut it into innumerable 
pieces which fell in heaps on the earth. 
Witnessing the strength of his rival, that lion among the 
Plavagas seized hold of a huge rock which he spun round, 
emitting a shout and, as it descended, that hero leaping down 
from his chariot, armed with his mace, stood waiting un perturbed. Meanwhile that rock discharged by Angada fell 
on the forefront of the battle where it shattered the chariot with 
its wheels, shafts and horses. 
Then the monkey broke off a great crag from the mountain 
once more and it was covered with trees and he brought it down 
on the head of his adversary so that Vajradamshtra, seized with 
a sudden giddiness, faltered and began to vomit blood, clenching 
his mace convulsively and breathing heavily. Thereafter, 
coming to his senses, in a transport of fury he hit the son of 
Bali full on the chest with his mace and, letting it fall, began to 
fight with his fists whereupon a hand-to-hand struggle ensued 
between monkey and titan. Exhausted by the blows, spitting 
blood, those valiant warriors resembled the planets Mars and 
Mercury. 
Meanwhile the exceedingly powerful Angada, that lion of 
Plavagas stood waiting and he seized hold of a shield covered 
with the hide of a bull and a great sword decorated with golden 
bells enveloped in a leathern sheath. 
« 133 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
In the midst of innumerable graceful evolutions, the monkey 
and the titan attacked each other, roaring and thirsting for victory. 
With their gaping wounds, they shone like two Kimshuka Trees 
in flower and the straggle robbed them of their breath so that 
they sank to their knees on the earth. Thereafter in the 
twinkling of an eye, Angada, that elephant among monkeys, 
rose up, his eyes inflamed like a serpent that has been struck 
with a stick and, with his stainless sword that was well sharpened, 
the son of Bali who was full of vigour, struck off the huge head 
of Vajradamshtra, whose limbs were bathed in blood. Under 
the stroke of that sword, his beautiful head fell, cleft in twain, 
the eyes rolling. 
Beholding Vajradamshtra slain, the titans, wild with terror, 
tied panic-stricken towards Lanka, harassed by the Plavamgamas, 
their faces woe-begone, their heads bowed in shame. 
Having struck down the enemy with his powerful arm, the 
mighty son of Bali experienced great joy amidst the monkey 
army, honoured by them for his high courage and he resembled 
the God of a Thousand Eyes surrounded by the Celestials. 
chapter 55 
Akampana goes out to fight against the Monkeys 
HEARING that Vajradamshtra had been slain by the son of Bali, 
Ravana addressed the General of his forces who, with joined 
palms, stood near him and said : — 
" Let the invincible titans of irresistible courage go forth 
immediately with Akampana at their head, who is conversant 
with the use of every weapon and missile; he excels in vanquishing 
the foe and in preserving and leading his own forces ; he has 
ever desired my welfare and loved war ; he will prove victorious 
over the two Kakutsthas and the exceedingly energetic Sugriva. 
The rest of the monkeys too are formidable but without doubt 
he will exterminate them all." 
At this command from Ravana, the valiant titan, in great haste, 
mobilized an entire division of the army. Furnished with every 
*34 
YUDDHA KANDA 
kind of weapon, those foremost of titans of terrifying aspect, 
fearful to look upon, rushed into the fray where their general 
had despatched them. 
Akampana of the stature and colour of a cloud, whose voice 
resembled thunder, ascended his car decorated with fine gold 
and set out surrounded by dreadful demons. He, who was 
incapable of trembling in battle even before the Gods themselves, 
seemed to the monkeys to be as splendid as the sun. As he 
sped on his way, furious and eager to enter into combat, the 
horses drawing his chariot were suddenly deprived of their 
energy and the left eye of that one who delighted in warfare began 
to twitch. His countenance grew pale, his voice trembled, the 
day which had seemed so fair became threatening and a bitter 
wind began to blow. Birds and beasts uttered mournful cries 
but that titan, who had the shoulders of a lion and the agility 
of a tiger, disregarding those portents, rushed towards the 
battlefield and, as he went forward with his troops, an immense 
tumult arose that seemed to convulse the ocean and the sound 
appalled the simian army, who, furnished with trees, prepared to 
enter into combat. 
Thereafter a fearful struggle ensued between monkeys and 
demons and, ready to sacrifice their lives in the cause of Rama 
and Ravana, those monkey and titan warriors of exceeding 
valour, who resembled hills, contended with each other and, 
the yells they emitted in the thick of the fight and the shouts of 
defiance that they let forth in their rage created an indescribable 
clamour. A thick coppery dust, raised by the monkeys and 
the titans enveloped the whole horizon and, in the midst of that 
yellow cloud resembling silk which covered them, the combatants 
could no longer distinguish each other on the field. Neither 
standard, banner, shield, weapon nor chariot could be discerned 
in that pall of dust and the terrific clamour of warriors challenging 
and rushing upon each other was appalling to hear, yet in the 
confusion no form was visible. 
In that fight monkeys fell under the blows of enraged monkeys, 
titans massacred titans in the darkness ; Plavagas and demons 
slew foe and friend, and the earth drenched with gore was thick 
with mud. 
Under the rain of blood the dust was laid, revealing the 
*35 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
earth covered with corpses. Then the monkeys and titans 
assailed each other with blows from trees, spears, maces, 
javelins, stones, bars and picks, wrestling with their adversaries 
who resembled mountains. In that encounter those monkeys 
slew the titans of dreadful deeds and they, transported with rage, 
bearing darts and javelins in their hands, destroyed the monkeys 
with their cruel weapons. 
Thereafter Akampana, the leader of the titans, full of ire, 
consoled all those fierce and valiant soldiers ; the monkeys 
however, leaping upon them, shattered their weapons and 
crushed those titans with blows from trees and stones. 
At that instant, the courageous monkey Leaders, Kumuda, 
Nala and Mainda, in a paroxysm of rage, as in sport, with 
mighty bounds and blows of trees created a great carnage 
amongst the titans and all those lions among the monkeys 
brought about complete disorder in the enemy ranks with 
their countless missiles. 
CHAPTER 56 
Akampana is slain by Hanuman 
Witnessing this great exploit executed by the monkey leaders, 
Akampana was seized with violent anger and his features 
became distorted. Brandishing his powerful bow, he addressed 
his charioteer in these words : — 
" Drive the chariot with all speed to that place, for those 
warriors axe slaying countless titans on the battlefield. Those 
arrogant monkeys of exceeding ferocity, armed with trees and 
rocks, dare to affront me ! I shall exterminate those audacious 
warriors who are seen sowing confusion in the ranks of the 
titans! " 
Thereupon, in his chariot drawn by fast-moving horses, 
Akampana, the most skilful of car-warriors, with a hail of darts, 
overwhelmed the monkeys so that they were no longer able to 
maintain their formation nor for this reason could they fight 
136 
YUDDHA KANDA 
and, crushed under die shafts of the than, the confusion became 
general. 
Then the valiant Hanuman, seeing them fell under the sway 
of death, pursued by Akampana's darts, went to the rescue of his 
companions and, beholding that great Plavaga, those lions 
among the monkeys rallied and, in the field, grouped themselves 
boldly round him. Observing his courage, those foremost of 
the monkeys took heart in the shelter of his valour. 
Meanwhile Akampana, like unto a second Mahendra, caused 
a hail of arrows to descend on Hanuman who remained as firm 
as a rock, heedless of the weapons that fell upon his body, and 
that exceedingly courageous monkey resolved to slay his 
adversary and, with peals of laughter, the impetuous son of 
Maruta leapt on the titan, causing the earth to shake as it were, 
while burning with energy he emitted yells, so that it was 
impossible to look upon him as it is impossible to gaze on a fire 
in a brazier. 
Finding himself without weapons, that foremost one among 
the monkeys, in the fury that possessed him, tore up a rock and 
seizing a huge crag with one hand, Maruti, letting forth a roar, 
began to spin it rapidly thereafter hurling it at the Titan Leader 
Akampana, as formerly in the encounter, Purandara hurled his 
thunderbolt at Namuchi. 
Akampana, however, seeing that crag flying towards him, 
shattered it from a distance by means of great crescent-shaped 
darts. Beholding that rocky peak shattered in the air by the 
titan's arrows and falling in pieces, Hanuman became mad with 
anger and observing an Ashvakarna Tree as large as a mountain, 
in the transport of rage that possessed him, that monkey uprooted 
it with violence and taking hold of that tree of immense branches, 
in his great strength, brandished it exultantly. Then he began 
to run with great strides, breaking down the trees in his haste 
and, in the excess of his fury, tearing up the earth with his feet; 
and he struck down elephants as also those who rode upon them 
and charioteers with their cars and the formidable titan 
infantry. 
Seeing Hanuman, like unto Antaka, the Destroyer of Vital 
Breaths, full of wrath, armed with a tree, the titans took to flight. 
Thereupon the valiant Akampana beholding that enraged monkey 
137 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
sowing terror amongst his soldiers, greatly perturbed, set up a 
mighty shout and, with fourteen pointed arrows that tore the 
flesh, he pierced the exceedingly powerful Hanuman. 
Riddled with sharp-pointed iron shafts, that simian warrior 
resembled a mountain covered with forests and, like unto a 
flowering Ashoka Tree, he shone like a smokeless flame. Up rooting another tree, with a prodigious bound he struck the 
head of the Titan General a fearful blow and, by that stroke with 
which that Indra among Monkeys smote him in his fury, 
Akampana fell dead. 
Seeing their leader lying lifeless on the earth, all the titans 
trembled as trees when the earth quakes. Put to flight, all those 
warriors, throwing away their arms, escaped in the direction of 
Lanka, terrified, pursued by the monkeys. Their hair loosened, 
panic-stricken, their pride broken by defeat, their limbs dripping 
with sweat, in their bewilderment, they fled in confusion. 
Thereafter, mad with fear, looking back continually, crushing 
each other in their haste, they entered the city. 
And when those titans had entered Lanka, those exceedingly 
powerful monkeys surrounded Hanuman in order to pay 
homage to him and the mighty Hanuman, of noble nature, 
honoured them all in accord with their rank. 
Then the triumphant monkeys shouted with might and main 
and once more pursued the titans with the intention of slaying 
them while that great Plavaga, born of Maruta, returning to his 
own companions, having slain the titan, enjoyed the same 
renown in battle as Vishnu when he overcame the mighty Asura 
of immense power in the forefront of the fight. 
Thereafter that monkey received the homage of the Gods and 
of Rama himself as also that of the exceedingly valiant Lakshmana 
and the Plavamgamas led by Sugriva and the great-souled 
Bibishana. 
i38 
YUDDHA KANDA 
CHAPTER 57 
Prahasta goes out to fight 
Hearing of Akampana's death, the irascible Lord of the Titans 
with a downcast mien, took counsel with his ministers and, 
having reflected awhile and deliberated with them, Ravana, 
the Lord of the Titans, passed the forenoon in inspecting the 
defences ; and the King passed through that city, decorated 
with banners and flags, guarded by the titans and filled with 
innumerable troops. 
Seeing Lanka beseiged, Ravana, the Sovereign of the Titans, 
said to the devoted Prahasta, a skilled soldier : — 
" This city thus beleaguered and hard pressed, O Skilful 
Warrior, may only be delivered by myself, Kumbhakama, thou, 
who art in command of the army, Indrajita or Nikumbha ; 
none else could undertake such a task ! 
" Taking a company of warriors, do thou speedily place thyself 
in their midst and set forth in order to triumph over those 
inhabitants of the woods. In this sortie, as soon as the army of 
monkeys hear the uproar created by the titans, they will disperse. 
Volatile, undisciplined and fickle, the monkeys will not be able 
to endure thy cry, any more than an elephant can endure the 
roaring of a lion. His army routed, Rama with Saumitri, 
robbed of further authority, wul fall into thy power, O Prahasta. 
"A hypothetical misfortune is preferable to one that is certain ! 
Whether it be unpleasing to hear or no, say what thou considerest 
to be to our advantage ! " 
Thus addressed by that Indra among Titans, Prahasta, the 
leader of the army, answered him as Ushanas the King of the 
Asuras, saying : — 
" O King, formerly we discussed this matter with the wise 
and, after examining the different points of view, a disagreement 
arose between us.To return Sita was what I considered the most 
advantageous course, not to do so, meant war ; we forsaw this. 
" I have ever been heaped with gifts and honours by thee as 
also with every mark of friendship. When the opportunity 
139 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
arises, is it not foi me to render thee a service ? Nay, I shall 
neither spare life, children, wife nor wealth ! Know me to be 
ready to sacrifice my life in thine interest in battle I " 
Having spoken thus to his brother, the General Prahasta said 
to his leading officers who stood before him : — 
" Gather a large army together immediately ; to-day the 
flesh-eating birds and beasts shall feed on the enemy that I 
strike down on the battlefield with my swift arrows ! " 
At this command those highly powerful leaders assembled the 
forces in the abode of the King of the Titans. In an instant, 
Lanka was filled with redoubtable warriors like unto elephants, 
furnished with weapons of every kind. 
While they propitiated the God who feeds on offerings1 and 
paid homage to the brahmins, a fragrant breeze, bearing the 
scent of clarified butter, began to blow and the titans, all ready 
for battle, taking hold of garlands of every kind, adorned 
themselves with delight. Thereafter, armed with bows and 
mail, they set out in their chariots at a brisk pace, their eyes 
turned towards their King, Ravana. And they ranged them selves round Prahasta whilst he paid obeisance to his Sovereign 
to the beating of a gong of dreadful sound, whereafter, with his 
weapons, that general ascended his chariot that was furnished 
with all that was needful, harnessed to exceedingly swift steeds, 
skilfully driven and in perfect condition. 
Rumbling like a great cloud, shining like the moon itself, 
unapproachable as the serpent that served as its standard, 
solidly and artistically constructed, decorated with a net of pure 
gold, smiling as it were in its magnificence, such was the car in 
which Prahasta, having received Ravana's command, stood. 
Then the titan set out from Lanka immediately in the midst 
of a powerful army and, at his departure, a rolling of drums, 
resembling the roar of Parjanya, and a blast of fanfares arose that 
seemed to fill the earth and, with the blare of conches, the titans 
advanced, creating a terrible uproar. 
Narantaka, Kumbhahanu, Mahanada and Samunata, colossal 
giants, his adjutants, surrounded Prahasta who emerged from 
the eastern gate in the midst of an immense, formidable and 
powerful army resembling a herd of elephants and, in the centre 
1 The Fire-god, Agnt. 
140 
YUDDHA KANDA 
of that force, vast as the sea, Prahasta in his fury appeared like 
Death at the end of the world, whilst the uproar, that arose on his 
setting forth with his titans raising their war cries, drew a 
sinister answering call from all creatures. 
In a cloudless sky, birds of prey advancing to meet the 
chariot, circled from left to right ; fearful jackals vomited forth 
fire and names, howling lugubriously ; a meteor fell from heaven 
and the wind blew chill ; planets, in opposition to each other, 
lost their brilliance whilst clouds with a raucous sound showered 
blood on Prahasta's car with which his attendants were 
bespattered ; a croaking vulture, facing the south, alighted on the 
top of his standard depriving that titan of bis lustre. His 
charioteer, who never turned back in battle, despite his skill, 
again and again allowed the goad to fall from his hand. The 
brilliance of that sortie of incomparable pomp vanished in an 
instant and the horses stumbled on the even ground. 
Beholding Prahasta, renowned for his martial valour, 
advancing to give battle, the army of monkeys, furnished with 
weapons of every kind, went forward to meet him and a formid able clamour arose amongst them as they tore up the trees and 
seized hold of great rocks. 
Thereafter the titans yelled and the monkeys roared, both 
armies being filled with ardour and, in their fury and zeal and 
their impatience to slay each other, they challenged one another 
with tremendous shouts. 
Meanwhile Prahasta advanced on the forces of the monkeys 
whom in his folly he imagined he would destroy and, with an 
impetuous bound, he hurled himself upon that army as a 
grasshopper falls into a flame. 
CHAPTER 58 
The Death of Prahasta 
Beholding Prahasta setting out with martial ardour, the 
Conqueror Rama, smiling, enquired of Bibishana, saying : — 
"Who is this colossus surrounded by an immense army, 
141 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
who with such speed, valour and courage, advances so swiftly ? 
Make known to me this brave ranger of the night." 
On this enquiry, Bibishana answered : — 
" Prahasta is the name of this titan ; he is the leader of the 
army ; a third of the forces belonging to the King of the Titans 
accompanies him. He is courageous, a master of the science 
of weapons and a warrior renowned for his prowess-" 
While the terrible Prahasta of formidable exploits advanced 
roaring, that colossus, surrounded by his troops, was observed 
by the great and powerful army of the monkeys who began to 
emit cries of defiance. 
Swords, lances, daggers, spears, darts, maces, bludgeons, bars, 
javelins and axes of every kind with many different bows 
glittered in the hands of the titans who, desirous of victory, 
fell upon the monkeys. 
Trees in flower, rocks, huge and heavy stones were the weapons 
of the Plavamgamas, who were burning to fight and, as they 
approached each other, a formidable struggle arose between 
those innumerable combatants, who showered down a hail of 
stones and arrows. In the conflict, countless titans caused the 
death of thousands of mighty monkeys and countless monkeys 
destroyed as many titans. Some of the combatants fell under the 
lances, others under great arrows, some were struck down by the 
blows of bars, others cloven by axes. Deprived of their life's 
breath they lay on the earth their hearts transfixed or cut to pieces 
by the avalanche of missiles. And those monkeys fell on the earth 
cut in two by the strokes of swords, their sides torn open by 
those bold titans and they, on their part, full of fury, overthrew 
the enemy ranks, heaping the earth with them, and they struck 
at them with trees and crags, administering thundering slaps 
and terrific blows with their fists, so that the titans, blinded, 
their faces ashen, vomited blood. 
Thereafter an appalling clamour arose and, amidst cries of 
pain and leonine roars, the monkeys and titans, each maddened, 
their features distorted, following the path of heroes, conducted 
themselves with great courage. Narantaka, Kumbhahanu, 
Mahanada and Samunnata, Prahasta's companions, decimated 
those inhabitants of the woods, hurling themselves on the 
monkeys in rage, destroying them ; and Dvivida struck down 
142 
YUDDHA KANDA 
one of them named Narantaka ; then the ape Durmukha, leaping 
up in his turn, with a ready hand, struck Samunnata with a 
great tree; Jambavan, in the height of anger, seizing a huge stone 
hurled it with force on Mahanada's chest and, on his side, the 
valiant Kumbhahanu, having attacked the General Tara, who 
was armed with a huge tree, received a blow that cost him his 
life. 
Infuriated by the quadruple murder, Prahasta, who stood in 
his chariot, with the bow held in his hand, caused a dreadful 
havoc amongst the monkeys and the two armies became a vortex, 
resembling a roaring tempest over a vast ocean. In that great 
battle, the titan, intoxicated with combat, in his fury annihilated 
the monkeys under an immense avalanche of arrows. The 
corpses of monkeys and titans heaped the ground and covered it 
tike hideous mountains and the earth, running with the blood 
which inundated it, shone as in the month of Spring when 
covered by the blossoming Palasha Trees. 
With the heaps of warriors for its banks, the broken weapons 
its uees, the torrents of blood its huge waves, death appeared 
like an ocean receiving its floods ; livers and spleens its mire, 
entrails its moss, severed heads and trunks the fish, and morsels 
of flesh the grass, innumerable vultures its lovely swans, herons 
its geese, covered as it was with fat for the foam, the tumult the 
sound of its waters, the battlefield resembled a river, incapable of 
being crossed, visited by waterfowl at the end of the rainy 
season. And the foremost of the titans and the monkeys crossed 
over that impassable river as elephants lead their herds across 
a lake that the lotuses have covered with pollen. 
Meanwhile Prahasta, standing in his chariot, letting fly 
countless shafts scattering the Plavamgamas, was observed by 
Nila and, like unto a violent wind, the General of the Titans 
beheld Nila advancing on him like a mass of clouds in the sky. 
Directing his chariot bright as the sun towards him, that 
foremost of archers, stretching his bow in the midst of the fray, 
covered Nila with his barbed shafts, which, piercing him in their 
rapid flight, passed through his body and, like furious serpents, 
buried themselves in the earth with great spurts. When Nila 
was wounded by those pointed shafts resembling tongues of fire, 
that huge and mighty monkey, brandishing a tree, struck that 
143 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
exceedingly redoubtable Prahasta who had set upon him with 
such fury. 
Roaring with anger under his blows, that lion among titans 
overwhelmed the monkey chief with a rain of arrows and the 
shower of missiles loosed by that cruet demon was received by 
the monkey with closed eyes. Like a bull standing under a 
sudden autumnal downpour, so under that intolerable rain of 
darts, Nila immediately closed bis eyes, suffering it, though it 
was scarce to be endured. Mad with rage, under the hail of 
arrows, that great and mighty monkey, arming himself with a 
Sala Tree, struck down Prahasta's horses and thereafter his heart 
surging with anger he severed the bow of that barbarian, shouting 
again and again. 
Deprived of his bow, Prahasta, the leader of the army, 
seizing a formidable mace, leapt down from his chariot, and those 
two generals, facing each other, adversaries full of courage, 
their limbs covered with blood, like unto two elephants with 
broken tusks, tore each other with their sharp teeth. Lion and 
tiger in gait, lion and tiger in prowess, those two warriors, 
vanquishers of other heroes, intrepid combatants, thirsting for 
fame, resembled Vritra and Vasava. 
Meanwhile Prahasta with a supreme effort struck Nila on the 
forehead with his mace, causing the blood to flow, whereupon 
that powerful monkey, his limbs covered with gore, seized a 
great tree and struck Prahasta full in the chest with fury. He, 
however, not heeding the impact, brandishing an enormous 
iron bar, hurled himself on the valiant Plavamgama. Seeing 
him advancing towards him with terrific bounds, full of rage, 
the mighty monkey Nila, snatched up a great rock which he 
swiftly threw at the head of his bellicose opponent armed with a 
mace. Loosed by that monkey chief, that immense and for midable stone broke into several pieces on Prahasta's head 
and the titan, deprived of breath, lustre, strength and 
consciousness instantly fell on the earth, like a tree severed at 
the root. 
From his riven head and body the blood flowed, so that it 
resembled a torrent falling from a mountain. Prahasta being 
slain by Nila, the invincible and mighty army of the titans 
bereft of joy, fled to Lanka, their leader having succumbed* nor 
144 
YUDDHA RANDA 
could they be stayed, as the waters of the sea may not be stemmed 
by a broken dyke. 
Their leader slain, the titans disconsolate regained the abode 
of their sovereign. Dumb and dispirited, plunged in an ocean 
of burning grief, they appeared to have lost their wits. 
The triumphant warrior Nila, however, on his return, was 
honoured by Rama with Lakshmana who accompanied him, 
and experienced supreme joy. 
chapter 59 
Ravana's Prowess. Rama overcomes Mm but grants htm 
his Life 
Their General having succumbed in the tight against the 
foremost of the monkeys, the heavily armed forces of the 
King of the Titans took to flight with the speed of the tide. 
Coming before their lord, they apprised him of the death 
of their leader who had fallen under the blows of the Fire-god's 
offspring, and at these tidings, the king was transported with 
anger. Learning that Prahasta had perished in the fight, his 
heart was filled with grief and he addressed the foremost of his 
leaders, as Indra those who never grow old1 and said : — 
" That foe is not to be despised, under whose blows the 
destroyer of Indra's host, the leader of my army with his followers 
and elephants, fell. I myself shall enter this strange battlefield 
without hesitation in order to obtain victory and destroy the 
enemy. As a forest is consumed by fire, so shall I to-day 
with a myriad arrows burn up the simian army with Rama and 
Lakshmana." 
Speaking thus, that enemy of the Lord of the Celestials 
ascended his chariot which shone like a flame and was yoked 
to a team of horses, its brilliance increased by the splendour of 
his person. 
The sound of trumpets, gongs, drums and leonine roars 
accompanied by the clapping of hands, acclamations and hymns 
1 The Gods, who »re Mid to remain young. 
145 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
of praise, frenziedly greeted the departure of the Sovereign of 
the Titans. Those eaters of flesh, resembling mountains or 
clouds, whose glances flashed like torches, surrounded the 
supreme Leader of the Titans as he marched out, like unto 
the Bhutas escorting Rudra, the Lord of the Immortals. 
Issuing from the city, that monarch observed the army of 
ferocious monkeys with trees and rocks in their hands, ready for 
combat, roaring like a vast ocean or a mass of thunder clouds. 
Seeing the demon divisions seething with fury, the incom parably illustrious Rama, whose arms resembled great serpents, 
accompanied by his forces, said to Bibishana : — 
" Who is in command of this army furnished with every 
kind of standard, banner and canopy, armed with javelins, 
swords, stakes and other weapons and missiles, that is indomitable 
and composed of intrepid soldiers and elephants as high as the 
Mahendra Mountain ? " 
Thus interrogated, Bibishana, the equal of Shakra in valour, 
pointed out the principal leaders of those courageous lions 
among the titans to him and said : — 
" That hero of coppery hue mounted on the back of an 
elephant, causing its head to sway, the rival of the rising sun, 
know, O Prince, to be Akampana. 
" He who, standing in his chariot, brandishes his bow which 
resembles Shakra's, whose standard bears the image of a lion 
and who is like unto an elephant with its long curved tusks, is 
Indrajita, who is renowned for the boons he has received from 
Brahma. 
" That archer yonder, like unto the Vindhya, Asta or 
Mahendra Mountains, standing in his car, a mighty warrior, 
who wields a bow of unequalled size, is called Atikaya on account 
of his immense stature. 
" The tawny-eyed warrior resembling the dawn, riding a 
wild elephant with its bells jangling, who is shouting aloud, is 
Mahodara. 
" The rider of the brilliantly caparisoned steed he, who is 
armed with a gleaming javelin and resembles a mass of evening 
clouds, whose fury rivals the lightning and possesses the velocity 
of a well-directed thunder-bolt, who is seated on the foremost 
of bulls and shines like the moon, is Trishiras. The other, 
146 
YUDDHA KANDA 
resembling a thunder-cloud, of large and well-developed chest, 
who is twanging his bow and has the King of the Snakes as his 
standard, is Kumbha. 
" The one who carries a mace decorated with gold and 
diamonds from which flames and smoke issue, who advances 
as a standard bearer to the titan army, is Nikumbha of prodigious 
exploits. 
" That warrior in a chariot adorned with flags, gleaming like 
a glowing brazier, who is furnished with bows, swords and 
arrows, is Narantaka, who, in combat, lights with mountain 
peaks. 
" Finally the one who appears surrounded by spectres of 
dreadful form with heads of tigers, buffalo, mighty elephants, 
deer and horses, riding under a white canopy with a slender 
handle, his diadem resembling the moon, he who is the humbler 
of the Gods themselves, like unto Rudra amidst the Bhutas 
is the mighty Lord of the Titans himself. His countenance 
is graced by swinging earrings, his formidable stature equals the 
Vindhya, that Lord of Mountains, he who brought Mahendra and 
Vaivasvat low, is the King of the Titans, equal to the sun in 
splendour." 
Then Rama, the subduer of his foes answered Bibishana 
and said : — 
" Ah ! What glory, what exceeding majesty is Ravana's, the 
Lord of the Titans ! As one cannot gaze on the sun, neither 
can the eye rest on him, such is the blinding strength of his 
magnificence ! Neither Devas, Danavas nor heroes possess a 
body equal to his ! Who can rival the brilliance of the King of 
the Titans ? All are as high as hills, all have crags as their 
weapons, all are furnished with fiery darts. The Lord of the 
Titans stands out among those ardent warriors as Antaka amidst 
the impetuous Bhutas of strange form. It is to his destruction 
that that wretch comes to-day within my sight ! To-day I 
shall slake my wrath born of Sita's abduction ! " 
At these words, the valiant Rama who was accompanied by 
Lakshmana, took up his bow and, standing erect, placed an 
arrow, the most powerful of all, upon it. 
Meanwhile the haughty Monarch of the Titans said to bis 
brave troops ; — 
*47 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
"Take up your positions unfalteringly at the gates and 
principal exits, the outposts and fortifications, Learning of 
my presence amongst you, these savages will try and profit 
by this opportunity to take this heretofore impregnable city by 
surprise, it being now denuded of its defenders, and they will 
then immediately put it to the sword with their united forces." 
Thereafter Havana dismissed his escort and the titans left 
on his orders, whereupon he plunged into the sea of monkeys, 
agitating it as a great fish the waters of the ocean. 
As soon as that India of the Titans with his bow and burnished 
arrows had thrown himself into the fray, the leader of the 
monkeys rushed out to meet him, tearing up a great mountain 
peak. Seizing that rock covered with innumerable trees, he 
hurled it at that prowler of the night, who, seeing it flying towards 
him, broke it in pieces with his golden-stemmed arrows. That 
huge and high peak covered with trees being shattered, fell 
on the earth, and the Lord of the Titans, like unto another 
Antaka, selected a dart resembling a great serpent. Taking up 
that arrow, which rivalled Anila in velocity and possessed the 
brilliance of fire and the force of lightning, he loosed it with 
fury on Sugriva in order to slay him, and that weapon, equal 
to Shakra's thunderbolt, loosed by Havana's arm, penetrated 
Sugriva's breast in its flight as formerly Guha's spear when 
he discharged it at the Krauncha Mountain. 
Wounded by that missile which bereft him of consciousness, 
that warrior fell moaning to the earth. Beholding him stretched 
on the ground deprived of bis senses, the Yatudhanas raised a 
shout of triumph. 
Thereupon Gavaksha, Gavaya, Sushena as well as Rishabha, 
Jyotirmukha and Nala, of exceeding corpulence, tearing up 
rocks, hurled themselves on the King of the Titans. Then 
that Lord of the Titans, with hundreds of arrows possessed 
of sharp points, rendered their projectiles fruitless and pierced 
those leaders of the monkeys with a hail of marvellous golden shafted arrows. 
Under the blows with which the Enemy of the Gods assailed 
them, those generals of terrifying stature were overcome, 
whereupon he covered that formidable army of monkeys with a 
shower of arrows. 
*4« 
YUDDHA RANDA 
Assailed and wounded, those warriors emitted cries of terror 
and pain, and those deer of the branches, whom Ravana was 
destroying with bis darts, fled for refuge to the intrepid Rama, 
whereupon that mighty and skilful archer, Raghava, seizing a 
weapon, set out at once. Lakshmana however, approaching 
him with joined palms, addressed him in moving tones, and 
said : — 
" Truly, O Noble Brother, I am able to slay this wretch ! 
It is I who will destroy him, do thou give me leave, O 
Lord ! " 
Then the exceedingly powerful Rama, a true hero, answered 
him saying : — 
" Go, O Lakshmana, and in this duel may thy valour prevail ! 
Without doubt Ravana is endowed with great strength, he is a 
warrior of outstanding prowess ; the Three Worlds themselves 
could not withstand his fury ; seek out his weak points and 
guard against thine own ; be ever vigilant and defend thyself 
with eye and bow ! " 
Thus spoke Raghava and Saumitri embraced him, thereafter 
offering obeisance to him and bidding him farewell, he entered 
the lists. There he beheld Ravana with arms as large as the 
trunks of elephants, who was brandishing his dread and fiery 
bow, covering the monkeys, whose limbs he had severed with a 
close rain of darts. 
Beholding this, the exceedingly energetic Hanuman, born of 
Maruta, in order to bring that rain of arrows to an end, rushed 
on Ravana and, approaching his chariot, lifted his right arm 
and threatened him; thereafter the sagacious Hanuman 
addressed him, saying : — 
" Thou hast obtained the boon of invulnerability to Devas, 
Danavas, Gandharvas, Yakshas and also Rakshasas but the 
monkeys are a danger to thee ! This five-branched hand of 
mine,1 which I now raise, will rob thee of the life that has long 
been resident in thy body ! " 
At these words of Hanuman, the exceedingly valiant Ravana, 
his eyes inflamed with anger, answered : — 
" Strike swiftly without fear ! Win eternal renown, having 
measured thy strength with mine, I shall destroy thee ! " 
1 Four fingers and the thumb. 
x. 149 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Then the son of the Wind answered Havana who spoke thus, 
saying : — 
" Recollect that I have slain thy son Aksha already ! " 
At this, the powerful Lord of the Titans struck the son of 
Anila a violent blow with the palm of his hand and the monkey 
reeled ; thereafter the mighty and illustrious Hanuman recovered 
his balance and, steadying himself, struck that enemy of the 
Immortals in fury. Under the violent impact of the monkey's 
blow, Dashagriva shook like a mountain when the earth trembles. 
Seeing Havana struck in the fight, Rishis, Siddhas and monkeys 
raised a great shout, as also the Devas, Suras and Asuras. 
Then the extremely spirited Ravana, having regained his 
breath, said : — 
** Well done ! Well done ! O Monkey, thou art an adversary 
worthy of praise ! " 
Thus did he speak, and Maruti answered him, saying : — 
" Cursed be that strength since thou dost still survive, O 
Ravana ! Now come, enter into a decisive struggle with me, 
O Perverse Wretch ! Why this boasting ? My fist is about to 
despatch thee to the abode of Yama ! " 
Hearing Hanuman's words, the powerful Ravana, enraged, 
his eyes red with fury, whirling his fist with force brought it 
down violently on the monkey's chest and, under the shock, 
Hanuman reeled once more, whilst the King of the Titans, 
Dashagriva, that exceedingly fiery warrior, seeing his valiant 
opponent bereft of strength, turned his chariot towards Nila. 
With his arrows, like unto great serpents, he pierced the vital 
parts of his enemy overwhelming the Monkey General, but Nila, 
the leader of the monkey army, assailed by that hail of weapons, 
with one hand flung a great rock at the King of the Titans. 
Meanwhile Hanuman, burning with courage, having re covered bis senses, in his martial ire cried out furiously : — 
" O Ravana, King of the Titans, who art engaged in combat with 
Nila, to attack one already fighting with another is unjust ! " 
The titan, however, shattered the crag, hurled by Nila, with 
seven pointed darts so that it fell in pieces and, seeing the rock 
riven asunder, the leader of the monkey army, Nila, destroyer 
of hostile forces, who resembled the Fire of Time, glowed with 
fury and began to hurl Asvakarna, Sala, Cuta and other flowering 
150 
YUDDHA KANDA 
trees of varying fragrance in the fight, whereupon Ravana 
caught them in his arms and snapped them, showering a 
formidable rain of shafts, as from a cloud, on Pavaki1 but that 
colossus, assuming a diminutive form, leapt on to the point of 
Ravana's standard. 
Beholding the offspring of Pavaki thus installed on the point 
of his standard, the King blazed with fury, whilst Nila let forth 
a shout, and sometimes the monkey leapt on to the apex of the 
banner and sometimes on to the end of the bow and sometimes 
on to the peak of the diadem, so that Lakshmana, Hanuman and 
Rama also, were astonished. 
The intrepid titan too was amazed at the monkey's agility 
and took up a marvellous and flaming arrow but the Plavam gamas shouted joyously at Nila's tactics, being amused to see 
Ravana disconcerted by his leaping about in combat and the 
shouts of the monkeys infuriated Dashagriva, who, in his con fusion, did not know how to act. 
Taking up an arrow charged with sacred formulas, that 
prowler of the night aimed at Nila, who had climbed to the 
tip of his standard and, at that instant, the King of the Titans, 
said : — 
" O Monkey, thine agility proceeds from a rare power of 
magic ; do thou save thyself if thou canst by these innumerable 
tricks with which thou art familiar and constantly employest ! 
This mantra-propelled weapon of mine, that I am about to 
loose, will sever the existence thou seekest to retain ! " 
Speaking thus, the long-armed Ravana, Lord of the Titans, 
having placed Agni's shaft on his bow, struck Nila, the General 
of the monkey army, with that weapon and he, pierced through 
the breast by that shaft charged with sacred mantras, was 
suddenly overcome and fell to the earth, yet by virtue of his 
sire's powerful aid and bis own native vigour, though brought 
to his knees he was not deprived of life. 
Beholding the monkey unconscious, Dashagriva, insatiable in 
combat, in his chariot, whose rattling resounded like thunder clouds, rushed on Lakshmana and coming to the centre of the 
field, halted, standing there in his glory. 
Thereafter the majestic Lord of the Titans lifted up his bow, 
* Pavaki — The name of Nila as son of the God of Fire. 
151 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
whereupon Saumkri, of indomitable courage, said to him as he 
prepared to loose his powerful shaft : — 
" O King of the Night-rangers, now enter into combat with 
me ; cease from fighting with the monkeys ! " 
Hearing that marvellously modulated voice that resounded 
like the twanging of a bow-string, the King, drawing near to his 
adversary, who stood close to his chariot, answered in anger : — 
" O Son of Raghu, it is my good fortune that brings thee 
within my range to-day, thou who, in thy folly, advancest to 
meet thy death ! This very instant thou shalt descend to the 
region of Mrityu under a rain of missiles loosed by me." 
Then Saumitri, unmoved, spoke to that boastful titan of 
sharp and protruding teeth, saying : — 
"O King, stout hearts eschew bragging! O Greatest of 
Evil Doers, thou art sounding thine own praises ! I am well 
acquainted with thy strength, prowess, vigour and audacity, 
O King of the Titans ! Approach ! Here I stand with bow and 
arrows in my hand ; of what use are vain boasts ? " 
Thus accosted, the Lord of the Titans, infuriated, let fly 
seven marvellously plumed arrows which Lakshmana shattered 
with his golden-shafted darts. Observing bis shafts resembling 
great serpents, whose coils had been crushed in an instant, the 
Lord of Lanka was transported with anger and let fly further 
sharp arrows. The younger brother of Rama, however, caused 
a well-aimed rain of missiles from his bow to fall on Ravana, 
but he, with the aid of weapons in the forms of knives, crescents 
and long-eared arrowheads, severed them, without allowing 
them to disturb him. 
Seeing that the succession of his shafts proved useless, the 
King of those hostile to the Gods, astonished at Lakshmana's 
skill, let fly more whetted shafts upon him anew and, from his 
side, Lakshmana, the equal of Mahendra, placing some sharpened 
darts on his bow that were forrnidable,swift as lightning and of 
blazing effulgence, loosed them on the Titan King in order to 
strike him down, whereupon Ravana shattered those pointed 
darts and struck his rival in the forehead with a shaft as bright as 
the Fire of Time, which had been bestowed on him by 
Swyambhu. Then Lakshmana, struck by that missile, reded a 
little, scarcely able to retain his bow but coming to himself with 
15a 
YUDDHA KANDA 
difficulty, he shattered that weapon belonging to Indra's foe. 
Having broken bis bow, the son of Dasaratha struck him with 
three pointed darts and the king, pierced by those arrows, 
swooned, regaining his senses with difficulty. Wounded by those 
shafts, his bow wholly demolished, his limbs spattered with 
flesh and streaming with blood, the Enemy of the Gods, himself 
of formidable energy, seized a spear which had been given him in 
war by Swyambhu. That smoking lance, as bright as fire, the 
terror of the monkeys in the fray, the powerful guardian of the 
titan empire, was hurled on Saumitri the younger brother of 
Bharata, who received that spear falling upon him with arrows 
and darts, as if it were a sacrificial fire ; nevertheless that weapon 
entered his broad chest. 
The powerful Raghu, struck by that spear, lay on the earth, 
breathing fire and the King of the Titans rushing on him suddenly, 
while he was yet insensible, seized him brutally in his two hands, 
yet though he was able to lift up Himavat, Mandara, Meru and 
the Three Worlds with the Gods, he could not raise the younger 
brother of Bharata, for Lakshmana, though wounded in the 
breast by Brahma's weapon, recollected that he was of the 
substance of Vishnu Himself, and that thorn in the side of the 
Gods, though overcoming Saumitri, was unable to bear him 
away. 
At that instant, the son of Vayu, enraged, threw himself in 
anger on Ravana like a flash of lightning and struck him with 
his fist on the chest Under that blow, the Lord of the Titans 
was brought to his knees and stumbling, fell. From his ten 
mouths, eyes and ears, blood streamed in torrents and, rolling 
unconscious, he slid under the body of the chariot; there he 
remained deprived of his senses, stupified, not knowing where 
he was. Beholding Ravana, despite his redoubtable strength 
swoon on the battlefield, Rishis and monkeys began to shout in 
triumph as did also the Gods and Asuras, whilst the courageous 
Hanuman lifting up Lakshmana in his arms, who had been 
wounded by his adversary, returned to Raghava. In bis 
friendship and extreme devotion to him, the son of Vayu found 
Lakshmana, whom foes were unable to move, as light as a 
feather. Thereafter the spear, that had overcome Saumitri, 
returned to the titan's chariot. 
*53 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Meanwhile Ravana who was full of energy in combat, having 
recovered consciousness, selected some steel-pointed arrows 
and armed himself with an enormous bow. 
On his side, healed and freed from that lance, Lakshmana 
recollected that he was part of Vishnu, and Rama, seeing the 
innumerable army of powerful monkeys overthrown on the 
battlefield, rushed on Ravana, but Hanuman, following him, 
said : — 
" Climb on my shoulders in order to overcome the titan ! " 
Hearing those words from the son of Vayu, Raghava climbed 
on the shoulders of that great monkey, as Vishnu on Garuda, 
in order to fight with the Enemy of the Gods. 
Standing in his chariot, Ravana appeared before that Lord 
of Men and, seeing him, that mighty hero rushed upon him, 
like unto Vishnu with his mace upraised rushing furiously on 
Virochana. Thereupon Rama drew the cord of bis bow and, 
like unto the roll of thunder, said in a deep voice to the Lord of 
the Titans :— 
" Stay 1 Stay ! Thou hast evoked my displeasure ! Where, 
O Tiger among the Titans, wilt thou flee to escape me ? Even if 
thou seekest refuge in the region of Indra or Vaivaswata or 
Bhaskara or Swyambhu, Vaishnavara, Shankara or in the ten 
regions, even in those abodes thou shalt not elude me from now 
on. The one who, struck by the spear, fell swooning this day 
only to recover consciousness immediately, shall now, assuming 
the form of death, claim thee, thy sons, and grandsons in battle. 
O King of the Titan People, here is he under whose blows, 
fourteen thousand titans of terrible form perished, who had 
established themselves in Janasthana and were furnished with 
excellent weapons." 
Hearing Raghava speak thus, the exceedingly powerful Lord 
of the Titans full of rage, hurled himself on the son of Vayu, 
who was bearing Rama with extreme velocity through the fray 
and, recollecting his former hostility, he smote him with 
flaming arrows resembling the tongues of the Fire of Dissolution, 
Struck by that titan as also pierced by his darts, the native 
strength of which Hanuman was possessed increased still further. 
Nevertheless the extremely illustrious Rama, seeing the wound 
that Ravana had just inflicted on that lion among the Plavagas, 
154 
YUDDHA KANDA 
was transported with anger and, approaching his chariot with 
his slender and pointed shafts, shattered it with its wheels, 
horses, banner, canopy, great standard, charioteer, darts, spears 
and swords ; thereafter, with great force, he hurled a weapon 
like unto a thunderbolt falling on Mount Mem so that that 
valiant monarch, whom neither thunder nor lightning could 
cause to tremble, stumbled, letting fall his bow at the violent 
impact of Rama's missile, which created a deep wound. 
Seeing him swooning, the magnanimous Rama took up a 
flaming arrow shaped like a crescent moon and used it to shatter 
the crown of the supreme Lord of the Titans, which was as 
bright as the sun. 
Then Rama said to that Indra of the Titans, whose splendour 
was dimmed, the setting of his diadem riven, and who resembled 
a venomous snake robbed of its poison, or the sun, its rays 
extinguished, bereft of lustre : — 
*' Thou hast accomplished a great feat and my brave soldiers 
have succumbed beneath thy blows ; now thou art weary ; in 
this condition I shall not put thee under Mrityu's power with 
my shafts. Leave the fray and return to Lanka ; I grant thee 
this reprieve, O King of the Rangers of the Night ! Having 
regained thy breath, return in thy chariot with thy bow and, 
standing on thy car, thou shalt once more bear testimony to my 
prowess ! " 
At these words, his joy and boasting subdued, his bow 
shattered, his horses and charioteer slain, pierced with arrows, 
his great diadem broken, the king instantly returned to Lanka. 
After the departure of that powerful Indra of Night Rangers, 
Lakshmana drew out the arrows from the monkeys, which they 
had received while fighting in the forefront of that vast battle field, and the adversary of the King of the Gods being van quished, all the Celestials, Asuras and creatures of the ocean 
and other regions with the great serpents, as also all beings 
on earth and in the waters, rejoiced. 
155 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 60 
The Titan$ rouse Kumbhakarna 
Returning to the City of Lanka, afflicted with the fear of 
Rama's arrows, his pride humbled, the king's mind was troubled. 
Like an elephant by a lion or a snake by Garuda, that monarch 
had been overcome by the great-souled Rama, and the Lord of 
the Titans was maddened by the mere recollection of Rama's 
shafts possessed of the splendour of lightning, resembling the 
Rod of Brahma. 
Seated on his magnificent and elevated throne made of gold, 
he let his gaze wander over the titans and said : — 
" Since I, the equal of the mighty Indra, have been defeated 
by a mere man, all the rigorous asceticism I have practised has 
been in vain. I asked to be rendered invulnerable to Devas, 
Danavas, Gandharvas, Yakshas, Rakshasas and Pannagas, but 
of man I made no mention. Rama, the son of Dasaratha is the 
one, I deem, of whom Anaranya,1 born of the race of Ikshvaku 
spoke, saying: — 
" *6 Lord of the Titans, in my House will be born a man who 
will slay thee in battle with thy sons, ministers, army and 
charioteer, O Vilest of Thy Race, O Perverse Wretch ! * 
" I was further cursed by Vcdavati for a former outrage and 
perchance she has been born as the bigh-souled daughter of 
Janaka and what was predicted by Uma, Nandishwara, Rambha 
and Punjikasthala, the daughter of Varuna, has come to pass ! 
The words of the sages never prove false, it is on account 
of all this therefore that you should exert yourselves to the 
uttermost. 
" Let the titans go to the summit of the Charyapura Mountain 
and awaken Kumbhakarna on whom the curse of Brahma rests, 
he who is without equal in prowess and who humbles the pride 
of the Gods and Danavas themselves." 
156 
YUDDHA KANDA 
Prahasta being slain and the king himself defeated in the 
fight, that monarch issued his commands to the dreadful host, 
saying : — 
" Guard the gates and man the ramparts, rouse Kumbhakarna 
who is slumbering soundly. He is sleeping peacefully oblivious 
of all that is passing, his senses overcome by lust, and he remains 
unconscious for periods of two or three or nine days and some times for six, seven or eight months. Having met in consultation 
with me nine days ago, he has since fallen asleep. In combat, 
that warrior is the rampart of all the titans ; he will soon strike 
down all the monkeys and those two sons of a king. He is the 
very banner of the titans in battle but that insensate one, 
intent on vulgar pleasures, still slumbers. Though overcome 
by Rama in this terrible struggle, my fears will be dissipated 
when Kumbhakarna wakes ; of what use is this rival of Indra 
to me, if, in so pressing a danger, he is not ready to assist 
me? " 
Hearing their sovereign's words, the titans ran in great haste 
to Kumbhakaraa's abode. At Ravana's command, those eaters 
of flesh and drinkers of blood took perfumes, garlands and a 
great store of food and left immediately. They entered that 
cave with its gates measuring a league in extent, the wonderful 
refuge of Kumbhakarna, from which issued the fragrance of 
flowers. And with his breathing, Kumbhakarna pressed those 
titans back despite their strength who, with difficulty, had 
penetrated into the cave. 
When they had entered into that ravishing underground 
dwelling paved with precious stones and gold, those lions 
among the Nairritas beheld that redoubtable giant lying there, 
and that monster, wrapt in profound slumber, resembled a 
crumbling mountain and together they sought to waken him. 
His limbs covered with down which stood on end, 
Kumbhakarna, he of irresistible valour, was breathing like a 
serpent, and, as he slept, he emitted dreadful snores, his nostrils 
being horrible and his mouth a gaping hell. Stretched to his 
full length on the earth, he gave forth an odour of marrow and 
blood ; his limbs were adorned with golden armlets and he 
wore a diadem as bright as the sun ; thus did that lion among 
the Nairritas, Kumbhakarna, the slayer of his foes, appear ! 
157 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Then those powerful titans, in order to satisfy him, placed a 
heap of venison as high as Mount Meru before him and piled 
up a great mass of viands, antelope, buffalo and bear and a 
prodigious mound of victuals, leathern bottles of blood and 
meats of every kind before Kumbhakarna, the Enemy of the 
Gods. Thereafter they rubbed that scourge of his foes with 
the most rare sandalwood and covered him with celestial 
garlands, and sweet smelling perfumes, and they burnt incense 
and hymned the praises of that warrior who proved fatal to his 
foes. 
The voices of the Yatudhanas burst forth on every side like 
thunder and with full cheeks they blew impatiently on their 
conches as bright as the moon, causing a terrible uproar, and 
those rangers of the night clapped their hands and shook 
Kumbhakarna, creating a great clamour, in order to awaken 
him, so that the birds passing through the air fell down at the 
sound of the conches, drums, gongs, clapping of hands and 
leonine roars. 
As the illustrious Kumbhakarna did not waken from his 
slumber despite the great uproar, all those troops of titans 
seized hold of bars, pestles, maces, rocks, clubs, hammers, and 
with these and blows from their fists, those titans beat the chest 
of Kumbhakarna violently as he was sleeping peacefully on the 
ground. And Kumbhakaraa's breathing prevented those titans 
from standing upright so that they had to seat themselves round 
him and, with all their strength, which was considerable, they 
began to beat drums, cymbals and gongs and to blow their 
myriad conches and trumpets. Ten thousand demons sur rounded that colossus who resembled a heap of antimony, and 
tried in every way to rouse him by their blows and cries; 
nevertheless be did not wake. 
As they were unable to rouse him by these means, they had 
resort to more energetic and ruthless methods, causing horses, 
camels and elephants, whom they beat with sticks, whips and 
thongs, to trample upon him, while gongs, conches and trumpets 
blared forth as they crushed his limbs under piles of heavy logs. 
The noise of the hammers and pestles they wielded with all 
their strength and the shouts they raised filled the whole of 
Lanka with its hills and woods but still he did not wake. 
158 
YUDDHA KANDA 
Then they beat a thousand drums simultaneously with sticks 
of refined gold but yet he did not stir from his profound 
slumber, being under the spell of the divine curse. 
Finally those powerful rangers of the night, growing enraged, 
redoubled their efforts in order to rouse the titan and some 
beat drums, some shouted, some tore out his hair and others bit 
his ears, pouring hundreds of pitchers of water into them, but 
Kumbhakarna, plunged in deep sleep, did not stir. Some 
armed with daggers struck that mighty titan on the head, chest 
and limbs but that monster did not wake, though smitten by 
Shataghnis fastened with ropes, and at last a thousand titans 
ran up and down his body, till Kumbhakarna, becoming aware 
of that pressure, he who had remained insensible to the violent 
blows of crags and trees, under the prompting of extreme hunger 
suddenly emerged from sleep, yawning, and with one bound, 
stood up. Waving his two arms resembling serpent's coils or 
the peaks of mountains, hard as cut diamonds, that ranger of the 
night opened his monstrous mouth, like unto Vadavamukha and 
yawned horribly, and when he yawned, his mouth resembled 
hell and glittered like the sun rising over the high peak of Mt. 
Meru. 
That extremely powerful ranger of the night, being awake, 
yawned, heaving a sigh like unto a tempest that shatters a 
mountain ; and Kumbhakarna, rising up, resembling Time at 
the dissolution of the world, prepared to devour all beings and 
his two great eyes, like glowing braziers, glittering like lightning, 
resembled two huge flaming planets. 
Then they pointed to those victuals of every kind, boar and 
buffalo and the giant devoured them. Thereafter that enemy 
of Shakra's satisfied his hunger with flesh and his thirst with 
blood, and he swallowed pitchers full of fat and wine, whereupon 
he, having feasted, those rangers of the night approached him 
and, surrounding him, paid obeisance to him. 
Raising his eyelids that were heavy with sleep, his gaze still 
veiled, he let bis glance fall on the night rangers on every side 
and, in a voice of authority, that lion among the Nairritas, 
surprised at being roused, enquired of them, saying : — 
" For what reason have you thus wakened me so suddenly ? 
Is all well with the king or is he in some peril ? In truth there 
159 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
must be some pressing and serious danger from an external 
source since you have come in haste to awaken me. I shall 
drive every misfortune away from the King of the Titans this 
very day even if I have to cut Mahendra himself to pieces or 
freeze Anala ! Nay, it is certain that one does not interrupt 
the slumbers of one, such as I, for any trivial motive. Tell 
me frankly for what reason you have roused me, Kumbhakarna, 
the vanquisher of my foes ? " 
At these words, that were tinged with wrath, Yupaksha, the 
king's confidential minister, with joined palms, answered him 
saying : — 
" It is not the Gods who threaten us in any way but a man 
who has placed us in this evil case, O Prince ! It is not the 
Devas or Danavas who have put us in this peril ; it comes to 
us from a mortal. Monkeys as large as hills are besieging 
Lanka ! Furious on account of Sita's abduction, Rama is 
pressing us heavily. Recently a single monkey set fire to our 
great city and slew the youthful Prince Aksha with his escort 
of elephants. ' Get thee hence ! ' were the words addressed 
by Rama to the King of the Titans in person, the offspring of 
Poulastya, that thorn in the side of the Gods, he who is equal 
to Aditya in splendour. That which this monarch never 
suffered at the hands of the Gods or Daityas or Danavas, he has 
had to endure from Rama, who spared his life." 
Hearing from Yupaksha that his brother had been defeated 
in combat, Kumbhakarna, rolling his great eyes, said : — 
" This very day, O Yupaksha, the whole army of monkeys 
with Lakshmana and Raghava will be destroyed by me on the 
field of battle after I have presented myself before Ravana. 
I shall gorge the titans on the blood of monkeys and, as for 
Rama and Lakshmana, I shall drink their blood myself 1 " 
Hearing these bold words from that titan, whose anger 
increased his ferocity, Mahodara, the Leader of the Nairrita 
warriors, having offered him obeisance with joined palms, 
said to him : — 
" When thou hast listened to Ravana and weighed the 
advantages and disadvantages of the matter, then, O Long-armed 
Warrior, set out immediately and destroy the foe on the battle field.'* 
1 60 
YUDDHA KANDA 
Thus spoke Mahodara and Kumbhakarna, surrounded by 
titans, full of energy and prowess, prepared to depart. Thereupon 
the titans, having succeeded in rousing that prince of dreadful 
aspect and formidable valour, returned to the king's palace in 
all haste. Approaching Dashagriva who was seated on the 
throne, all those night-rangers with joined palms said to him : — 
" Thy brother, Kumbhakama, has wakened, O King of the 
Titans, and now is it thy will that he should enter the battlefield 
or dost thou desire him to come hither ? " 
Thereupon Ravana answered those titans who stood before 
him and, with a glad heart, said : — 
" I desire to see him here ; let him receive the honours due 
to his rank ! " 
" Be it so ! " answered all the titans and they returned to 
Kumbhakarna in order to apprise him of Havana's command 
and said : — 
" Do thou go to the king, that lion of all the titans desires to 
see thee ; go and gratify thy brother ! " 
Then Kumbhakarna, that indomitable and mighty warrior, 
hearing what was his brother's wish, cried : — " So be it ! " and 
leapt up from his couch. Washing his face and bathing, 
refreshed and delighted, he desired them to bring him to drink 
with speed, whereupon they brought him a soothing draught 
and those titans hastened to carry out Havana's commands and 
presented him with wines and meats of every kind. 
Having swallowed two thousand full pitchers, Kumbhakarna 
prepared to set out and, slightly inebriated and flushed, he was 
exhilarated and filled with energy. Impatiently, he marched 
away like Yama at the end of the World period, and approaching 
his brother's palace, he caused the earth to tremble with his 
tread. His body illumined the royal highway, like unto that 
orb of a thousand rays which gives light to the earth and, as he 
advanced, surrounded by a circle of titans paying him obeisance, 
he resembled Shatakratu approaching Swyambhu's abode. 
Seeing that slayer of his foes on the royal highway, that 
monster as high as the peak of a mountain, the inhabitants 
of the woods, stationed outside (the city) as also their leaders, 
were seized with a sudden panic. 
Some rushed to Rama for refuge, others fled away in fear, 
161 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
some, terrified, stampeded in all directions, others, paralysed 
with fright, lay on the ground. 
Beholding that giant like a great peak, adorned with a diadem, 
who seemed to quench the sun with his brilliance, the inhabitants 
of the woods were seized with terror and, at the sight of that 
prodigy, fled in all directions. 
CHAPTER 6 I 
The Story of Kumbkakarna 
Meanwhile the illustrious and valiant Rama, bow in hand, 
beheld that giant Kumbhakarna adorned with a diadem and, 
seeing that Indra among Titans with golden armlets, who 
resembled a mountain and was like unto a cloud charged with 
rain, or Narayana1 when formerly taking the three strides, 
the monkeys scattered once more. 
In view of the stampede of his forces and that titan, who 
appeared to be increasing in size, Rama, astonished, enquired of 
Bibishana : — 
" Who is this hero with a diadem and yellow eyes, resembling 
a mountain, who is to be seen in Lanka like unto a cloud riven 
by lightning or a great and strange meteor which has fallen to 
earth ; he, at whose sight, the monkeys flee away on all sides ? 
Tell me, who is this colossus ? Is it a Rakshasa or an Asura ? 
Never have I seen such a being ! " 
Thus questioned by Prince Rama of imperishable exploits, 
Bibishana, in his great wisdom, answered : — 
" It is he by whom Vaivasvata and Vasava were defeated in 
battle ; it is the illustrious Kumbhakarna, the son of Vaishravas I 
There is no titan equal to him in stature, he routed the Devas, 
Danavas, Yakshas, Bhujamgas, Pishitashanas, Gandharvas, 
Vidyadharas and Pannagas in their thousands, O Raghava ! 
The Gods themselves are not able to slay Kumbhakarna, who, 
spear in hand, is of monstrous aspect. ' It is the God of Death 
himself ' they cry. 
1 See glossary. 
162 
YUDDHA KANDA 
" The mighty Kumbhakarna is innately powerful, whilst the 
foremost of the titans owe their strength to the boons they have 
received. As soon as that monster was born and while yet an 
infant, urged on by hunger, he devoured thousands of beings. 
Seeing their kind consumed, those creatures, mad with fear, 
took refuge with Shakra and told him all that had taken place. 
Enraged, Mahendra struck Kumbhakarna with his mighty 
thunderbolt and, at the impact of Indra's weapon, that giant 
reeled howling with terror. 
" When the cries of the titan were heard, the fear of those 
beings increased, and in his anger, the mighty Kumbhakarna 
tore out one of Airavata's tusks in order to pierce Vasava's 
breast and, under the blows of that monster, Indra appeared 
like a name. Seeing this, the Devas, Brahmarishis and Danavas 
were thunderstruck and Shakra with those Celestials went to 
Swyambhu's abode and informed Prajapati of Kumbhakama's 
wickedness ; he also described to the inhabitants of the heavenly 
region, how he had devoured all those creatures, laid waste the 
hermitages and carried off others wives and said ' If he continues 
to devour those beings, in a short time the whole world will 
become a desert*. 
" Hearing Vasava's words, the Grandsire of the Worlds 
summoned that titan, who appeared before him. On beholding 
Kumbhakarna, Prajapati was troubled but, recovering himself, 
said to him : — 
" 'Assuredly Poulastya begot thee to the destruction of the 
worlds ! From to-day thou shall sleep like the dead ! * Struck 
by the Lord's curse that titan fell down before him. 
" Meanwhile Ravana, exceedingly perturbed, said to Brahma: — 
" 'Thou hast hewn down the golden tree which was about 
to bear fruit! It does not behove thee to curse thine own 
grandson, O Prajapati ; nevertheless thy words may never prove 
vain ; assuredly he must slumber but at least appoint a time for 
sleeping and a time for waking 1 ' 
" On Havana's request, Swyambhu answered : — ' He shall 
sleep for six months and wake for a single day ; for one day that 
warrior shall range the earth in order to appease his hunger, 
otherwise with his huge mouth he will consume the worlds 
like a great fire.' 
163 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
" It is in fear of thy prowess that the Ring Ravana, beset with 
peril, has now awakened Kumbhakarna, and that warrior of 
exceeding valour has emerged from his retreat transported with 
anger and is rushing upon the monkeys in order to devour them 
and appease his hunger. Seeing Kumbhakarna they have 
taken to flight; how can those monkeys withstand him in 
combat? Let them be told that he is merely a mechanical 
device created to frighten them ; at these tidings they will take 
heart and remain here." 
Hearing Bibishana's eloquent and persuasive speech, Raghava 
said to the General Nila : — 
" Go, rally thy forces and, having occupied the outposts of 
Lanka, the highways and bridges, let them strike camp, O 
Pavaki! See that the monkeys, furnished with rocks, trees 
and stones, arm themselves with these weapons." 
At Rama's command, Nila, the leader in chief, a prince of 
monkeys, issued his orders to the army and thereafter armed 
with boulders, Gavaksha, Sharabha, Hanuman and Angada, 
like unto hills, advanced to the gates. 
Having listened to Rama, the monkeys, those valiant apes, 
fell upon the enemy's army with shouts of triumph, battering it 
with trees and that ferocious company of monkeys, brandishing 
crags and trees, appeared as resplendent as a lowering mass of 
clouds spreading over a mountain. 
chapter 62 
The Meeting between Kumbhakarna and Ravana 
Meanwhile that Lion among the Titans, resplendent in glory, 
still heavy with sleep, advanced with great strides along the 
royal highway ; titans in their thousands surrounded that most 
invincible of warriors and, from the houses, a rain of flowers 
fell upon him as he passed. 
Thereafter he beheld the vast and enchanting residence 
covered with gold of that Indra of the Titans which shone like 
the sun, resembling that orb when it enters a mass of clouds, 
164 
YUDDHA KANDA 
and he penetrated into the palace belonging to the King of the 
Titans, observing him from afar on his throne, like unto Shakra 
approaching Swyambhu seated in state. 
Coming to Ravana's abode with his escort of titans, 
Kumbhakarna, pacing the earth, caused it to tremble. Having 
crossed the threshold of the palace, he passed through the 
courtyard and perceived his elder brother, who appeared 
troubled, seated in the Chariot Pushpaka. Full of anxiety, 
Dashagriva, beholding Kumbhakarna, immediately rose up 
joyfully and motioned him to approach. 
Then that mighty warrior, bowing to the feet of his brother, 
who was reclining on a couch, enquired of him :— " What dost 
thou desire of me ? ** 
With renewed delight, Ravana rose and embraced him 
whereupon with brotherly salutations and traditional courtesies, 
Kumbhakarna ascended the celestial and shining throne, and 
that giant being seated, his eyes red with anger, enquired of 
Ravana : — 
" Why hast thou forcibly torn me from my slumber, O King ? 
Say from whence springs thy fear and whom dost thou wish 
me to slay this day ? " 
Then Ravana answered the enraged Kumbhakarna seated 
beside him, who was rolling his inflamed eyes, and said : — 
" Thou hast slumbered for some time, O Warrior, and, in 
thy profound oblivion, wert indifferent to the peril in which 
Rama has plunged me. This glorious and mighty son of 
Dasaratha accompanied by Sugriva, having crossed the sea 
without hindrance, is destroying our race. Alas ! See how 
by means of a bridge, these monkeys have made an ocean of the 
woods and groves of Lanka ! 
" The foremost of the titans have been slain by them in 
combat, nor do I see how these monkeys can be destroyed in 
battle by any means. Save us from this great peril, O Mighty 
Hero, and exterminate them to-day ! It is on this account 
that thou hast been awakened ; all my resources are exhausted ! 
Help me to save the City of Lanka, in which the children and the 
aged alone remain. O Long-armed Warrior, for thy brother's 
sake, accomplish this feat, impossible to another. I have never 
before spoken thus to any of my brothers, O Scourge of Thy 
h 165 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Foes ! I have placed my supreme hopes and affections on thee ! 
O Bull among the Titans, how often, in the wars between Devas 
and Asuras, hast thou overcome the Gods and Celestial Beings 
ranged against thee ! Call upon thy valour, assuredly among 
all creatures none is equal to thee in strength, O Redoubtable 
Hero ! Render me this great service, O Thou, the lover of 
combat ; do this for me, O Thou who art devoted to thy friends ! 
By thy personal prowess scatter these hostile forces as the wind 
scatters the autumnal clouds." 
CHAPTER 63 
Kumbhakarna consoles Ravana 
Hearing the lament of the King of the Titans, Kumbhakarna 
said with a mocking laugh : — 
" As an evil doer falls into hell as a result of his misdeeds, a 
swift retribution has followed on the error of judgment we saw 
thee commit formerly in council through lack of trust in thy 
ministers ! Firstly, O Great King, thou didst not reflect on 
what might happen and, in the pride of thine own strength, 
overlooked the consequences. He, who trusting in his own 
power, leaves until last that which should be done first or who 
does first, that which should follow, is unable to distinguish 
between what is wise and what is foolish. As offerings poured 
into an unsanctified fire so are those actions disastrous which 
are performed without regard to time and place or in opposition 
to them. He goes straight to the goal, who, in consultation 
with his ministers, has examined the three kinds of action and 
their five aspects1. A king who makes his decisions according 
to the traditional laws, and allows himself to be advised by his 
counsellors and consults his friends, pursuing duty, profit and 
1 Three kinds of action — Trivial, common or ordinary, important and 
urgent. 
Five aspects — The consideration of (a) Time, (b) Place, (e) Oi persona 
or things concerned, {&) Provision against mischance, (e) Consideration of the 
possibility of success. 
166 
YUDDHA KANDA 
pleasure1 at the proper season or following two of them or all of 
them combined, is a wise monarch and has a sound under standing, O Lord of the Titans. 
" But the sovereign or heir-apparent, who, having heard what 
is best for the cultivation of these three means and yet does not 
comprehend them, has spent his time listening to instruction 
in vain. The king who consults his ministers regarding the 
bestowal of gifts, conciliation, sowing dissension, taking action 
or uniting himself with the foe as also the consideration of what 
should or should not be done and the questions of duty, profit 
and pursuit of pleasure, dealing with them in conformity with 
circumstances, and is master of himself, is not visited by mis fortune! 
" He verily is a king, who, with experienced and sagacious 
counsellors, having studied the advantages he desires to reap 
from an undertaking and the wisdom of entering into it, takes 
action. 
" One should never follow the advice of those admitted to 
council who are not conversant with the meaning of the 
scriptures, whose intelligence is equal to the beasts and who, 
in their conceit, prate continuously ! Neither should one follow 
the advice of those who, in their ignorance of the tradition and 
the works of political science, merely seek to amass wealth. 
And those counsellors who, in their complacency, hold specious 
but sinister debates, should be excluded from any deliberation, 
for they mar every transaction. Those in the pay of well informed enemies, who, in order to betray their master, advise 
him to act contrary to his interests, will be recognized by the 
king when they are in the assembly, and a monarch will soon 
discover those who, under the mask of devotion hide their 
treachery, by studying their conduct in their deliberations when 
they are met together. Those foolish ones, who rush precipitately 
into action like birds entering a hole in the Krauncha Mountain, 
are overwhelmed by the enemy and he who, disregarding the 
foe, fails to protect himself, experiences nothing but reverses 
and loses his status. 
1 Duty, profit and pleasure — The Three Ends of Life should be pursued in 
the following order : — Duty or devotion in the morning, profit or affairs in 
the afternoon and the pursuit of pleasure in the evening. 
167 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
"The advice that the beloved Mandodari and my younger 
brother, Bibishana, formerly gave thee, I now repeat for thine 
own good ; do what thou considerest best ! " 
Hearing Kumbhakarna's words, Dashagriva frowned and 
replied angrily : — 
" One should pay the same respect to one's elder brother 
as to one's spiritual preceptor ! Of what interest to me are 
thy counsels ? Why fatigue thyself? Consider what is fitting 
at the moment ; whatever has impeded success, whether it has 
been folly or too great a confidence in the strength of mine army, 
it is useless to discuss it now ! Advise me as to what should be 
done in the present circumstances. Let thy valour remedy the 
evil that mine imprudence has brought about if thou art truly 
devoted to me and hast confidence in thine own prowess and 
if thine heart is in this great struggle and thou considerest it 
to be of supreme moment. He is a friend who rescues one in 
distress ; a kinsman he, who helps one who has failed." 
Thus spoke Ravana in imperious and harsh accents and 
Kumbhakarna reflecting within himself ' he is enraged ', 
answered him mildly in soothing tones, Looking fixedly at 
his brother, whose mind was agitated, he spoke comforting 
words to him in a quiet voice, saying : — 
" Listen carefully, O King, O Scourge of Thy Foes, O 
Leader of the Titan Princes, banish thy grief, renounce thine 
anger and be thyself again ! There is no reason for thine 
heart to be troubled as long as I live, O Lord ! I will slay him 
who is the cause of thy distress but, in any circumstances, I 
had, of necessity, to speak for thine own good because of 
kinship and brotherly affection for thee, O Monarch. 
" It is on account of this that I will show myself to be a friend 
and a brother and, in combat, annihilate the enemy under thine 
eyes. To-day, O Long-armed Warrior, thou shalt see me in the 
forefront of battle, having slain Rama and his brother and put 
the monkey army to flight. Seeing me bring back Rama's head 
from the battlefield this day, thou wilt be happy, O Warrior, and 
Sita overwhelmed with despair. 
" T o-day all the titans of Lanka, whose kinsfolk have perished, 
will witness the death of Rama who is the object of men's 
desires ! By striking down the foe in battle, I shall dry the 
1 68 
YUDDHA KANDA 
tears of those who are overcome with sorrow and have been 
rendered desolate by the loss of their relatives. To-day thou 
shalt see Sugriva, the leader of the Plavagas, who resembles a 
mountain illumined by the sun, lying on the earth. The titans, 
and I also, are eager to slay Dasaratha's son ; this should fill thee 
with confidence, how is it that thou art still trembling, O 
Irreproachable Hero? Should he slay me, Raghava will 
assuredly slay thee also but I have nothing to fear, O Lord of the 
Titans 1 Now command me, O Scourge of Thy Foes, do not 
seek another for this encounter, O Incomparable Hero ! I shall 
destroy thy foes despite their strength ! Even were it Shakra 
or Yama or Pavaka or Maruta, I should enter into combat with 
them or with Kuvera or Varuna themselves ; I, who in stature 
am like unto a mountain, with a sharpened spear as my weapon, 
my war-cry, my pointed teeth, at the sight of which Purandara 
himself trembles, throwing away my arms, shall strike down the 
foe with blows of my fists. None will be able to withstand me, 
no matter how much they may cling to life, nor have I need of 
lance, mace, sword or whetted dart ; with my bare hands alone, 
I will kill Raghava, were he accompanied by the God who bears 
the Thunderbolt himself ! If he is able to withstand the force 
of my fists then mine arrows will drink his life's blood ! O 
King, I stand here, why art thou overwhelmed with despair ? 
Here I wait ready to exterminate the slayers of titans, by whom 
Lanka has been set on fire, and also the monkeys, in the struggle 
that is about to take place. I shall confer a rare and great glory 
upon thee ! Did the danger come from Indra or Swyambhu 
or the Gods themselves, I should make them measure their 
length on the field of battle, O King ! I shall overcome Yama, 
consume Pavaka, hurl down Varuna, pulverize the mountains 
and shatter the earth ! After my long sleep, let those beings 
I am about to consume, witness the prowess of Kumbhakarna 
this day ! Nay, the Three Worlds shall not be able to glut mine 
appetite ! In order to please thee I will slay the son of Dasaratha! 
Having struck down Rama and Laksjhmana, I shall devour all 
the foremost of the monkey leaders. Rejoice therefore, O King 
and drink wine, do what thou hast to do and banish grief; 
to-day I shall send Rama to the abode of death and Sita will 
become thine for ever ! " 
x«9 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 64 
Mahodara's Speech 
Hearing this speech of the colossal and valiant Kumbhakama, 
Mahodara replied : — 
" Kumbhakama, thou art an offshoot of an illustrious race, 
thou an courageous but thou hast two vulgar characteristics 
and, in thy conceit, art unable to anticipate the course of events 
in all its aspects. 
" It is not true that the king does not understand what is 
politic and impolitic, O Kumbhakama, but thou, in thy youthful 
impetuosity, knowest only how to prate ! The Lord of the 
Titans, who is conversant with the laws of time and place, is 
also aware of increase and loss as well as our situation and the 
state of the enemy. 
" What man of sense would attempt that which an old thick headed soldier with no respect even for his elders plumes himself 
on accomplishing ? When thou dost assert that duty, profit 
and pleasure are essentially opposed to each other, it is a proof 
that thou art unaware of their real nature. Action is un doubtedly the source of all experiences and here below, 
happiness is the fruit we seek even in our most evil acts. Apart 
from pleasure, duty and profit yield felicity, but the fruit reaped 
from injustice and unrighteousness is calamitous. Men of 
strong character undertake those acts, the consequences of which 
they reap in another world, whilst those who give themselves 
up to the pursuit of pleasure reap the consequences here. 
" Why should that which the king has so much at heart and 
which we approve, namely the chastising of his enemies, be set 
aside in any way? As for the motives thou hast given for 
marching against Rama single-handed, I will point out to thee 
what is ill-considered and reprehensible about them! How 
canst thou defeat Rama alone, he who formerly destroyed 
innumerable exceedingly powerful titans in Janasthana ? Those 
rangers of the night whom he overcame in Janasthana were 
valiant warriors also and dost thou not behold them in the city, 
170 
YUDDHA KANDA 
stricken with fear ? By rousing Rama, the son of Dasaratha, 
who resembles a wounded lion, alas thou art waking a sleeping 
serpent ! Burning with valour and unapproachable in his fury, 
inaccessible as Mrityu, who would dare to challenge him ? This 
entire army cannot face that foe without being imperilled, 
therefore it in no wise recommends itself to me that thou 
shouldst go out to meet him alone, O Child. Who, bereft of 
resources would be eager to meet with an adversary, ready to 
sacrifice his life and furnished with every pre-requisite ! Rama 
has no equal among men, O Best of the Titans, how canst thou 
plume thyself on entering into combat with him who is the 
rival of Indra and Vaivasvata ? " 
Having spoken thus to the enraged Kumbhakarna, Mahodara 
said to Ravana, the Destroyer of the Worlds, who was surrounded 
by the titans : — 
" Having formerly borne Vaidehi away, why dost thou delay ? 
If thou desirest Sita to submit to thy will, I see a means of 
bringing her to thy feet. If it pleases thee, O Indra among the 
Titans, then hear me ! 
" Let it be proclaimed that I, Dvijihva, Samhradin, 
Kumbhakarna and Vitadarna, all five, are going forth to slay 
Rama ! We shall engage him in a fierce struggle and, if we 
triumph over thine enemy, we need resort to no other means, 
but, if thy rival survive and we escape from the fight, then we 
will adopt the measures I have planned. 
" We shall return from the battlefield and come hither 
covered with blood, our limbs pierced by darts on which are 
engraved Rama's name, and relate how we have destroyed 
Raghava and Lakshmana ! Thereafter we shall press thy feet 
and thou wilt cover us with honour, after which, mounted on 
an elephant thou wilt publish the tidings throughout the city, 
relating how Rama, his brother and his army were entirely 
destroyed. Simulating an extreme satisfaction, O Subduer 
of Thy Foes, thou wilt promote feasting and rejoicing and 
bestow gold and slaves on thy servants and distribute garlands, 
raiment and perfumes on thy warriors, thou thyself manifesting 
thy delight by drinking. Thereupon a rumour will spread 
everywhere that Rama and his friends have been devoured by 
the titans ; such will be the report ! 
171 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
" Then shalt thou repair secretly to where Sita is, in order 
to offer her consolation and tempt her with grain, diamonds and 
entertainment in order to seduce her. By this deceit, O King, 
Site's grief will be increased and she, bereft of felicity, without 
a protector, will accede to thy desire. Learning that her 
charming lord is slain, Sita, in despair and on account of womanly 
frailty, will submit to thy will ! 
" Brought up in the lap of prosperity, this woman who is 
worthy of felicity and who is afflicted with misfortune, realising 
her happiness depends on thee, will surrender herself wholly 
to thee. 
" This is the best course for thee to follow. Even to behold 
Rama may prove disastrous ; have no anxiety ! Great happiness 
awaits thee here without entering into combat ! Neither 
losing thy forces nor courting danger, triumph over thine 
enemy, O Monarch ! Glory, felicity, prosperity and renown 
will long be the lot of thy sovereign majesty ! " 
chapter 65 
Kumbhakarna enters into Combat 
Replying to Mahodara's reproaches, Kumbhakarna said to his 
brother, Ravana, the King of the Titans : — 
" Forsooth I shall dispel the immediate peril this day by 
slaying that wretch, Rama ! Freed from thine adversary, be 
happy ! Heroes do not thunder in vain like clouds bereft of 
rain ! Do thou mark how my threats find fulfilment in mine 
exploits ! Warriors do not need to boast, and accomplish the 
most difficult of feats without bluster ! Cowardly monarchs, 
devoid of intelligence, who plume themselves on being wise, 
will ever find thy speech acceptable, O Mahodara ! 
" All you effeminate creatures, agreeable talkers, who flatter 
the king, have always ruined any martial enterprise. Nothing 
is left in Lanka save its sovereign ; its wealth is exhausted, its 
army destroyed and that monarch is beset by foes in the guise 
of friends ! I shall go out and fight, determined to triumph 
172 
YUDDHA KANDA 
over the foe and, in this wise, redeem thy calamitous policy 
in this great struggle." 
Hearing these words of the intelligent Kumbharkarna, the 
King of the Titans answered laughing : — 
" In sooth, Rama has terrorized Mahodara ! Assuredly he 
does not relish battle, O Dear Friend ! O Sagacious Warrior, I 
have none equal to thee in devotion and prowess ; go, slay mine 
adversary, O Kumbhakarna and speed towards victory ! 
" Thou wast sleeping and it was for mine enemy's destruction 
that I had thee wakened ; this hour is of extreme significance 
to the titans, O Vanquisher of thy Foes ! Go, arm thyself; 
let those two princes, the equals of Aditya in splendour, be 
thy pasture ! Beholding thee, the monkeys will take to flight 
and the hearts of Rama and Lakshmana will cease to beat." 
Having spoken thus to the exceedingly powerful Kumbhakarna, 
that illustrious lion of the titans felt he had received new life. 
Aware of Kumbhakarna's prowess and knowing his valour, 
the king expanded with joy like unto the immaculate moon. 
Hearing bis words, which filled him with delight, that warrior 
went away and, having listened to the king's speech, prepared 
for battle. Then that scourge of his foes vigorously brandished 
his iron spear decorated with fine gold that shone brightly and 
was as renowned as Indra's thunderbolt and equally heavy. 
The scourge of the Devas, Danavas, Gandharvas, Yakshas and 
Pannagas, wreathed in garlands, festooned with crimson 
Sowers, emitting flames, that great spear, stained with the blood 
of bis enemies, was taken up by the illustrious Kumbhakarna, 
who addressed Ravana, saying : — 
" I shall set out alone ; let thy powerful army remain here ! 
To-day in mine hunger and fury, I shall devour the monkeys ! " 
At these words of Kumbhakarna, Ravana answered : — 
" Do thou go out accompanied by troops furnished with 
picks and hammers ; those monkeys are brave and exceedingly 
energetic ! He who is rash enough to meet them alone will be 
torn to pieces by their teeth, yet, though they are extremely 
difficult to overcome, surround thyself with warriors and setting 
out, utterly destroy that enemy host so fatal to the titans ! " 
Thereafter, descending from the throne, the mighty Ravana 
placed a diadem, the interior of which was encrusted with 
173 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
pearls, on Kumbhakarna's brow and decked out that hero with 
bracelets, rings, precious gems and a necklace as bright as the 
moon, covering his limbs with celestial and fragrant garlands 
and setting earrings in his ears. With the bracelets, anklets 
and golden coins1, with which he was adorned, the large-eyed 
Kumbhakarna shone like the sacrificial fire. 
Resplendent with his great dark-blue girdle, he resembled 
the Mandara Mountain encircled by the snake at the time of 
the churning of the water of immortality. Clad in golden 
armour that no arrow could penetrate, which in its natural 
brilliance seemed to project flames, he was rendered as radiant 
as the King of the Mountains encircled by evening clouds. 
His entire body was covered with ornaments of every kind and, 
spear in hand, that titan called to mind Narayana, when, in 
his might, he took the three strides. 
Thereafter that warrior embraced his brother and paid 
obeisance to him by circumambulating him in the traditional 
manner and, inclining his head to him, set out to the sound of 
conches and gongs. 
Then Ravana, dismissing him with good wishes, caused an 
escort of well-equipped soldiers to accompany him with 
elephants, horses and chariots, emitting a sound like thunder clouds. Valiant fighters accompanied that prince of warriors 
mounted on serpents, buffalo, donkeys, lions, elephants 
antelopes and birds. 
It was under a prodigious shower of blossom, a parasol over 
him, bearing a pointed spear in bis hand, full of daring, that the 
enemy of Devas and Danavas, intoxicated with the smell of 
blood, set forth. And innumerable titans followed him on foot, 
full of energy and prowess, fierce of aspect, bearing weapons in 
their hands, their eyes red ; and their ranks measured many 
leagues in extent and they resembled heaps of antimony and 
brandished maces, swords, sharp axes, javelins, bars, ramrods, 
hammers, great Sala Trees and were furnished with nets. 
Meanwhile Kumbhakarna, assuming another terrible and 
ferocious form, advanced impetuously, measuring a hundred 
bows in breadth and six hundred in height, formidable, full of 
power and energy with eyes like unto chariot wheels. And, 
1 Lit. Mishkas — See glossary. 
174 
YUDDHA KANDA 
having assembled the titans, that colossus with his large mouth, 
who looked like a flaming crag said with a mocking laugh : — 
" To-day the foremost of the monkey divisions will be 
consumed by me in my wrath one after the other like moths in 
a flame. Yet those inhabitants of the woods have never given 
offence and their race adorns the gardens of our dwellings. 
" The cause of the city being beseiged is Raghava, and 
Lakshmana who accompanies him ; he being slain, all will be 
slain ; I shall therefore destroy him in fight." 
At these words of Kumbhakarna, the titans emitted a great 
shout that seemed to agitate the ocean. 
Then the crafty Kumbhakarna went forth and sinister 
portents appeared on every side ; dark and fearful clouds 
accompanied by meteors were seen, and the earth, the sea and the 
forests trembled. Jackals of ferocious aspect, with flames 
darting from their mouths, began to howl and birds wheeled 
from left to right. A vulture alighted on the titan's spear as he 
advanced, and his left eye and arm twitched ; a flaming meteor 
fell with a terrible crash ; the sun lost its brilliance and no 
favourable wind blew. 
Without heeding these threatening portents, causing the 
hair to stand on end, Kumbhakarna set out, urged on by the 
force of destiny. Having crossed the ramparts, that giant, 
equal to a mountain, beheld the vast army of the monkeys 
resembling a cloud and, seeing that most powerful of the titans, 
as high as a mountain, those monkeys fled in all directions, like 
clouds driven before the wind. At the sight of that tremendous 
host of monkeys scattering to the four quarters like a mass of 
cloud melting away, Kumbhakarna joyfully redoubled his 
shouts resembling thunder. 
Hearing those terrible shouts, like unto the roar of clouds in 
the sky, countless Plavagas fell to the earth like great Sala Trees 
whose roots have been severed and, as Kumbhakarna hurled 
himself on the enemy with his huge mace in order to destroy 
him, he filled the ranks of the monkeys with extreme fear as 
does the Lord of Death accompanied by his minions at the end 
of the World Period. 
175 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 66 
Angada reproaches the Monkeys for flying from Kumbhakarna 
Having leapt over the wall, Kumbhakarna, that giant, like unto 
the peak of a mountain, full of valour, set out from the city in 
haste and emitted a great shout which agitated the waters, 
drowned the thunder claps and appeared to shatter the 
mountains. 
Seeing that warrior of fierce glance, as invincible as Maghavat, 
Yama or Varuna, the monkeys stampeded, and Prince Angada, 
beholding them fleeing, addressed the mighty Nala, Nila, 
Gavaksha and Kumuda, saying : — 
" Forgetting your native valour and noble lineage, where are 
you fleeing in terror like common monkeys ? Come back, O 
Companions, return ! Is it thus that you defend your lives ? 
Nay, this titan is not able to tight against you all ; he is here to 
create panic amongst you. This great fear, that the titan 
inspires in you, will be dispelled by our prowess ; return, O 
Flavamgamas ! " 
Rallied with difficulty from here and there and re-assured, 
those monkeys, armed with trees, halted in the field, and those 
dwellers in the woods stayed there ready to advance in fury on 
Kumbhakarna, like elephants intoxicated with Mada juice. 
Thereafter they attacked him valiantly with blows from mountain 
peaks, rocks and trees with their flowering crests but were 
unable to overthrow him. Innumerable stones, and trees with 
blossoming tops fell shattered on the earth, having come in 
contact with his limbs and that hero, enraged, on his side, 
struck down the ranks of those energetic monkeys by exercising 
bis great strength, like unto a fire which suddenly blazes forth 
in the forest. Their limbs be-spattered with blood, those lions 
among the monkeys, overcome and cut down, lay there in great 
numbers resembling trees with coppery flowers. Thereafter, 
those monkeys bounded away without looking in which direction 
and some threw themselves into the sea and some leapt into the 
176 
YUDDHA KANDA 
air. Overcome by that titan, who was disporting himself, 
some, despite their valour, fled over the sea by the way by which 
they had come and some, pale and distraught, escaped to the 
valleys. The bears climbed into the trees and some took 
refuge in the mountains ; others being no longer able to stand, 
fell down and remained lying on the earth insensible as if asleep 
or dead. 
Seeing the monkeys routed, Angada called out to them : — 
" Stay ! Let us fight ! Return, O Plavamgamas ! Were you to 
range the whole earth in your flight I see no refuge for you 
anywhere I Why do you seek to preserve your lives ? If you 
fly, leaving your weapons, lest they impede your course, your 
wives will deride you for this cowardice, which is death to men 
of honour, O Warriors ! Whither are you fleeing filled with 
fear like common monkeys, you who are born in rich and 
illustrious families? Where are those deeds of valour and 
prowess of which you boasted in the assembly ? The reproach 
of cowardice will be heard by you ; he, who seeks to save his 
life by fleeing, is despised ! Follow the path chosen by men 
of courage and overcome your fears. If, after a brief existence, 
you lie stretched on the earth dead, you will attain Brahmaloka, 
inaccessible to cowards. We shall acquire glory by striking 
down the foe in fight and, if we succumb, we shall enjoy the 
treasures of heaven in the region of heroes, O Monkeys ! Nay, 
Kumbhakarna will never return alive, having come before 
Kakutstha, as a moth that draws near to a glowing brazier. 
If one, despite our numbers, is able to disperse us and we 
preserve our lives by fleeing, then there is an end to our 
renown ! " 
Such was Angada's speech, he of the golden bracelets, and the 
fugitives replied to that hero's reproaches, saying : — 
" That Titan Kumbhakarna, has caused a terrible carnage 
amongst us ; it is not the moment to stay ; life is dear to us ! " 
With these words the leaders of the monkeys, beholding that 
giant of fearful glance advancing, scattered in all directions. 
Nevertheless Angada, by his exhortations and arguments, 
succeeded in rallying them and, re-assured by that sagacious 
son of Bali, they submitted to his commands and those foremost 
of monkeys returned to the field. 
177 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 67 
Kumbhakarna' s Exploits. He is slain by Rama 
Retracing their steps on hearing the voice of Angada, all those 
huge-bodied monkeys, resolutely taking their stand, desired 
nothing more than to join issue in the fight. 
Their confidence restored by the words of the valiant Angada, 
those monkeys, feeling their energy revived and their courage 
mounting, advanced, resolving to die and sacrifice their lives. 
Then those giants, arming themselves with trees and enormous 
crags, which they spun with great rapidity, hurled themselves 
on Kumbhakarna, whereupon, full of ire and vigour, that 
warrior of immense stature, brandishing his mace, dispersed 
the enemy on every side. Seven hundred and eight thousand 
monkeys lay scattered on the earth struck down by 
Kumbhakarna and, like unto Garuda consuming serpents, he 
seized hold of seven, eight, ten, twenty and thirty in his arms, 
crushing and devouring them in his extreme fury as he ran. 
Re-assured with exceeding difficulty, those monkeys rallied 
here and there and, armed with trees and rocks, took up their 
stand in the forefront of the battle. At that instant, Dvivida, 
that lion among monkeys, resembling a threatening cloud, 
tearing up a rock, hurled himself on the enemy who was like 
unto a mountain peak ; and that monkey, breaking off the crag, 
flung it at Kumbhakarna, missing him, so that the missile fell 
on the titan force, crushing horses, elephants and chariots 
harnessed to excellent steeds. Another rock created further 
victims and, under that avalanche of stones, the titans wounded, 
their horses slain, their charioteers struck down, streaming with 
blood and mounted in then cars, suddenly let forth terrible 
cries and with the aid of death-dealing arrows, severed the heads 
of those foremost of monkeys who were roaring. 
On their side, the monkeys, full of valour, uprooted great 
trees in order to crush the chariots, horses, elephants, buffalo 
and titans and, from the air where he was stationed, Hanuman 
178 
YUDDHA KANDA 
showered rocks, stones and trees of every kind on the head of 
Kumbhakarna but that mighty one split and evaded that rain 
of trees. And he hurled himself upon that great army of 
monkeys brandishing his sharp pick and, as he rushed forward 
Hanuman placed himself in the way armed with the peak of a 
mountain, and, in fury struck Kumbhakarna a violent blow, 
who, in his appalling corpulence, appeared like a hill ! Then 
he whose limbs were dripping with fat and streaming with 
blood, stumbled under the shock and the titan hurled his spear, 
which was as bright as lightning and like a mountain spouting 
forth flames, striking Maruti between the arms, as Guha 
formerly struck the Krauncha Mountain with his formidable 
lance. His breast pierced by that spear, beside himself, 
vomiting blood, Hanuman, in fury, let forth a terrible cry in 
the midst of the battle, like the roar of a thundercloud at the 
end of the World Period, and a great cheer arose from the ranks 
of the titans as they beheld his plight, whilst the monkeys, 
distraught and terrified, fled from the field. 
At that instant, summoning up his courage, the valiant Nila 
discharged a crag against that crafty titan, who, seeing it 
approaching, struck it with his fist and, on the impact, that rock 
broke and fell on the earth emitting sparks of fire. Then 
Rishabha, Sharabha, Nila, Gavaksha and Gandamadhana, 
those five tigers among the monkeys, hurled themselves on 
Kumbhakarna and, in the struggle, showered him with blows 
from stones, trees, the palms of their hands, feet and fists, 
attacking that giant on every side. Kumbhakarna, however, 
scarcely felt those blows and, unheeding, seized the impetuous 
Rishabha in his two arms. Crashed in this embrace, that bull 
among the monkeys fell to the ground, his mouth filled with 
blood. 
Thereafter, in the fight, that enemy of Indra struck Sharabha 
with his fist, Nila with his knee and Gavaksha with the palm 
of his hand. Dazed by the blows they had received, terrified, 
covered with blood, they fell on the earth like Kimshuka Trees 
that have been uprooted. Those powerful leaders of the 
monkeys being overcome, the rest hurled themselves in thousands 
on Kumbhakarna and, flinging themselves upon him and 
climbing about aim as if he were a rock, those bulls among the 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Plavagas, who themselves resembled hills, attacked and bit him. 
With their nails, teeth, fists and arms, those foremost of monkeys 
assailed the valiant Kumbhakama, a veritable tiger in stature, 
and that titan, covered by thousands of apes, resembled a 
mountain overgrown by trees. Crushing all those monkeys in 
his arms, that giant devoured them, as Garuda the serpents. 
Cast into Kumbhakarna's mouth, that resembled the pit of hell, 
the monkeys issued from his ears and nostrils. As high as a 
mountain in his rage he devoured those monkeys, and that 
prince of titans crushed them covering the earth with their 
flesh and blood and ranging through their ranks which he 
overran, so that he appeared like the Fire of Time itself. 
Resembling Shakra bearing the thunderbolt in his hand or Death 
with the noose, so did that powerful titan appear, armed with 
his spear, in the fight. As in the summer season, fire destroys 
the dry forests, so did Kumbhakama consume the simian 
ranks. 
Thus decimated, their leaders struck down, the Plavamgamas, 
wild with terror, emitted dreadful cries and, overpowered again 
and again by Kumbhakama, those monkeys fled for refuge to 
Ragbava. Witnessing the massacre of those monkeys, Angada, 
bom of the son of the Bearer of the Thunderbolt, hurled 
himself in rage upon Kumbhakama in the struggle. Seizing 
hold of a great crag, he roared again and again, putting all the 
titans, who accompanied Kumbhakama, to flight ; thereafter he 
struck the head of his adversary with the rock, and that enemy 
of Indra inflamed with anger on receiving the blow, leapt with 
one bound upon the irascible son of Bali. Emitting loud cries, 
that titan struck terror among the monkeys and, in his anger, 
threw his spear with extreme force at Angada, but with a light 
bound, that valiant lion among the monkeys, an experienced 
warrior, avoided the impact and leapt on his opponent, striking 
his chest with the palm of his hand. That violent blow dazed 
the giant, who resembled a mountain, but regaining his senses 
that most powerful of titans, doubling his fist, with a mocking 
laugh, struck, Angada who fell insensible to the earth. 
As that lion among the Plavagas lay stretched unconscious 
on the ground, Kumbhakama, brandishing his spear, rushed on 
Sugriva and, seeing that colossus running towards him, the 
1 80 
YUDDHA KANDA 
courageous King of the Monkeys went out to meet him where upon, beholding that Indra among the Monkeys advancing, 
Kumbhakarna halted and stood facing him with braced limbs. 
Beholding Kumbhakarna standing still, bis body streaming 
with the blood of the great monkeys whom he had devoured, 
Sugriva said to him : — 
" In slaying these warriors thou hast accomplished a most 
difficult feat and, by devouring my soldiers, hast acquired 
immense renown ; now let the army of monkeys be, what hast 
thou to do with common folk ? Do thou seek to bear the weight 
of this rock I am about to hurl on thee, O Titan ! Find thy 
satisfaction in slaying me, O Titan, thou who resemblest a 
mountain ! '* 
At these words of the King of the Monkeys, who was possessed 
of courage and fortitude, that lion among the titans, answered : — 
** Thou art the grandson of Prajapati and the son of 
Riksharajas, thou art energetic and brave, hence thine arrogance, 
O Monkey ! " 
At these words of Kumbhakarna, Sugriva, taking up a stone, 
hurled it at him suddenly and struck his breast with that missile 
resembling a thunderbolt. The rock broke on the huge chest 
of that giant and the titans were appalled, whilst from the ranks 
of the monkeys rose shouts of joy. Struck by that rocky peak, 
Kumbhakarna, enraged, roared ; opening bis huge mouth wide 
and brandishing his spear, that resembled lightning, he hurled 
it at the King of the Monkeys and the Bears in order to slay 
him. As it fell, the son of Anila, Hanuman, with his two hands 
seized hold of that sharp spear and its gold-encircled shaft 
loosed by the titan's arm and, in play as it were, broke that 
powerful weapon across his knee. 
Seeing his lance shattered to pieces by Hanuman, the army 
of monkeys, in a transport of delight, began to cheer. Meanwhile 
hearing those rangers of the woods emitting leonine roars and 
lauding Maruti in their joy, on beholding his spear shattered, 
that titan became enraged and, pale with fear, tore oft a peak 
of the Malaya Mountain nearby, in the vicinity of Lanka, 
hurling it on Sugriva in order to strike him down. Struck by 
that crag, the Indra of the Monkeys fell on the earth insensible 
and the Yatudhanas let forth a roar of triumph. 
N 181 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Thereafter Kumbhakarna, approaching that powerful King 
of the Monkeys, lifted him up and bore him away like unto a 
violent wind driving away a cloud and, as he ranged the battle field dragging Sugriva with him, who resembled a great cloud, 
Kumbhakarna, with his lofty stature, appeared like Mount 
Meru of exceedingly high peaks. Having laid hold of Sugriva, 
the mighty Lord of the Titans turned towards Lanka amidst the 
acclamations of his own people and the wailing of the Inhabitants 
of the Celestial Region, who were inconsolable on account of the 
capture of the King of the Plavamgamas and, having overcome 
the King of the Monkeys, that enemy of Indra and his rival in 
power, reflected : — ' He being dead, the entire simian host is 
destroyed together with Raghava ! * 
Then Hanuman, the sagacious son of Maruta, seeing Sugriva 
borne away by Kumbhakarna and the monkeys fleeing, thought 
to himself: *Now that Sugriva has been made captive what 
ought I to do? Assuredly I shall accomplish that which is 
fitting ; in order to slay this titan, I shall assume the shape of a 
mountain ! When I have destroyed the extremely powerful 
Kumbhakarna in combat by pounding his body with blows and 
have delivered the king, die delight of the monkeys will be 
general ! Yet that great monkey is well able to free himself 
though meseems, that, struck by Kumbhakarna with a rock in 
the struggle, the Chief of the Monkeys is not yet conscious of his 
plight. Presently, when Sugriva recovers consciousness, he 
will know how to save himself and the monkeys in this great 
conflict. That warrior will not be pleased if I deliver him, 
for his fair name would be tarnished and irretrievably lost. 
That is why I shall delay a while so that he may extricate himself 
from this predicament by bis own prowess and I shall confine 
myself to rallying the scattered forces/ 
Reflecting thus, Hanuman, born of Maruta, sought to instil 
courage into the simian army. 
Meanwhile, bearing the great and quivering form of the 
monkey in his arms, Kumbhakarna returned to Lanka, and from 
the temples, highways, dwellings and city gates, the people 
honoured him with a rain of flowers. Under the shower of 
roasted grain and the fragrance of the blossoms with which he 
was drenched and also on account of the coolness of the royal 
182 
YUDDHA KANDA 
highway, little by little the valiant Sugriva recovered con sciousness. Borne in the arms of his powerful rival and, beholding 
the great highway of the city, that warrior was assailed by 
innumerable thoughts — ' Taken captive in this way, what can 
I do now ? I shall act in such a way that it is to the advantage 
of the monkeys.' 
Then with his sharp nails, the King of the Monkeys, instantly 
attacked the enemy of the Gods and tore off his two ears with 
his teeth, biting off his nose and splitting his thighs with his feet. 
With his nose and ears torn off by Sugriva's teeth and nails, 
Kumbhakarna, transported with anger, his limbs covered with 
blood, threw the monkey down in order to crush him. Flung 
to the ground with fearful violence and struck by the Enemy 
of the Gods, Sugriva bounced into the air like a ball and with 
all speed flew to rejoin Rama. 
Kumbhakarna, his ears and nose severed, drenched in gore, 
shone like a mountain with its torrents and, covered with blood, 
vomiting blood, that gigantic titan of fearful aspect, the younger 
brother of Ravana, blazed with anger. Like unto a mass of 
dark collyrium or an evening cloud, that formidable Ranger of 
the Night resolved to enter into combat once more and, Sugriva 
having escaped, that enemy of Indra, furious, immediately 
threw himself into the struggle but reflecting ' I have no 
weapon * that ferocious warrior seized hold of a huge hammer. 
Issuing from the city, the valiant titan began to consume the 
redoubtable army of the monkeys with the violence of Fire at 
the destruction of the worlds. Famished and avid for flesh, 
Kumbhakarna entered the ranks of the monkeys and, in his 
rage, like unto Mrityu at the end of the world period, in discriminately ate up titan, monkey, Pisacha and bear. 
Thereafter in his fury, he consumed the monkeys, seizing one, 
two, three or more in one hand and titans also, thrusting them 
greedily into his mouth so that he streamed with flesh and blood 
and, though struck by the peaks of mountains, continued to 
feast on those monkeys, whilst they, seeing their companions 
being devoured, took refuge with Rama, whereupon 
Kumbhakarna, in a transport of rage, pursued them in order 
to consume them. Seizing them in his arms, in die chase, he 
took hold of them in groups of seven, eight, twenty, thirty and 
183 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
a hundred ; his limbs were covered with fat, flesh and blood, 
while wreaths of tangled entrails hung over his ears, and that 
colossus, of sharp teeth, began to discharge his weapons so that 
he appeared like Time at the end of the world. 
At that instant, the son of Sumitra, the scourge of enemy 
hosts and the destroyer of hostile citadels, enraged, entered the 
fight and the courageous Lakshmana loosed seven darts into 
Kumbhakama's body, aiming a hail of other missiles on him 
but Kumbhakarna shook off those falling shafts. Then the 
valiant son of Sumitra was provoked beyond measure and 
covered the shining armour of that titan, that was made of gold, 
with his shafts, as a mountain is overlaid with clouds by the 
wind at evening. Like unto a mass of dark collyrium, that titan, 
riddled with golden darts, blazed like the sun shining amidst 
the clouds. And that terrible monster, whose voice equalled 
the crash of countless thunder-clouds, spoke scornfully, 
increasing Saumitri's delight, saying : — 
" Thou hast manifested thy courage by entering into combat, 
fearlessly with me, I who have overcome Antaka himself 
without difficulty in the field ! He who is able to face the rival 
of Mrityu himself, armed for combat, is worthy of honour, 
how much more so if he should enter into conflict with him ! 
Mounted on Airavata surrounded by the Gods, Shakra, their 
king, has never dared to challenge me to battle. This courage 
from a youth is gratifying to me ; now go hence, O Saumitri, I 
wish to meet Raghava ! 
M In sooth thy valour, energy and martial prowess are pleasing 
to me but my only desire is to slay Rama, when he is slain, all 
are slain ! When Rama has fallen under my blows, I shall fight 
with all my might against all those who remain on the battlefield ! " 
Thus boastfully did the titan speak and Saumitri, with a 
mocking smile, answered in dread accents saying : — 
** That thy prowess renders thee invincible to Shakra and the 
other Gods is true, O Warrior, and to-day thou dost manifest 
the same valour ! Yonder is the son of Dasaratha immoveable 
as a rock ! " 
Hearing these words, that ranger of the night, the mighty and 
powerful Kumbhakarna, disregarding Lakshmana, passed him 
by and, causing the earth to tremble, rushed on Rama. 
184 
YUDDHA KANDA 
The son of Dasaratha, Rama, however, loosed some pointed 
arrows with Indra's weapon on Kumbhakarna's breast and, 
wounded by Rama in his furious course, flames mixed with 
embers shot from his mouth ! Pierced by Rama's arrow, that 
lion among the titans, emitting a terrible cry, hurled himself 
full of rage upon Raghava, throwing off the monkeys. With 
bis breast pierced with darts, adorned with peacock's plumes, 
his mace fell shattered from his hand and all his weapons were 
scattered on the earth. Finding himself disarmed, that colossus 
created a great carnage with his fists and hands.1 Covered with 
blood, that streamed from his wounds, like a torrent falling from 
a mountain, his limbs riddled with arrows, maddened by the 
smell of blood, he rushed about in bis violent rage devouring 
the monkeys, titans and bears. Brandishing a huge crag, that 
mighty and formidable giant, the equal of Antaka, hurled it at 
Rama but before it reached him, that hero struck it in the centre 
with the aid of seven infallible darts. 
The virtuous Rama, elder brother of Bharata, shattered it with 
arrows encrusted with gold and, like unto the peak of Meru, 
that crag, shining with splendour, fell, crushing two hundred 
monkeys. 
At that instant, the virtuous Lakshmana, after reflecting deeply 
on the various means of destroying Kumbhakama, said to Rama: 
" O Prince, that monster is no longer able to distinguish 
between monkeys and titans ; drunk with the smell of blood, he 
devours friends and foes alike ! Let the foremost of the 
monkeys climb upon him courageously and let their officers 
and leaders hang upon him on every side ; under the heavy 
load that will crush him as he is rushing over the ground, 
that insensate one will annihilate the titans and not the 
monkeys." 
At these words of that intelligent prince, the valiant monkeys 
all flung themselves on Kumbhakama with alacrity and he, full 
of ire against the monkeys, who had climbed on his back, shook 
them violently as a fierce elephant his keepers. Seeing the titan 
shaking himself thus, Rama said to himself : ' He is incensed ' 
and rushed upon him with his excellent bow. His eyes red with 
anger, the intrepid Raghava, consuming him with bis glance as 
1 He having many arms. 
185 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIK1 
it were, bounded quickly forward, re-tssuring the leaders, who 
were tormenting the mighty Kumbhakama and, in order to 
encourage the monkeys, taking hold of his great bow encrusted 
with gold, that with its cord resembled a serpent, Rama advanced 
with his huge quiver full of arrows. 
Surrounded by the monkey host, that warrior went forward 
full of valour, followed by Lakshmana and he beheld the 
illustrious and mighty Kumbhakama, the vanquisher of his foes, 
surrounded by titans, his eyes inflamed, adorned with golden 
bracelets, pursuing all those monkeys with fury like unto one of 
the elephants of the four quarters; and he resembled the 
Vindhya or Mandara Mountains and was vomiting blood like 
a great cloud pouring down rain. With his tongue he licked 
the corners of bis mouth that were wet with blood while he 
continued to destroy the simian army like Death at the end of 
the world. 
Beholding that Prince of the Titans shining like a glowing 
Yjrnki , that lion among men stretched his bow, and the sound of 
that weapon infuriated that foremost of the titans, who, highly 
provoked, hurled himself on Raghava. 
Meanwhile Rama, whose arms were like unto the great coils 
of the King of the Serpents, said ro Kumbhakama who, possessing 
the splendour of a mountain, was rushing to attack him like a 
cloud driven by the tempest : — 
" Come, O Prince of the Titans, tremble not, I await thee bow 
in hand and in an instant will deprive thee of life ! " 
' It is Rama ! ' reflected Kumbhakama and, bursting forth 
into hideous laughter, rushed forward in fury, scattering the 
monkeys on the battlefield. By his monstrous and terrible 
laughter, like unto the muttering of a thundercloud, he seemed 
to cleave the hearts of the inhabitants of the woods, and 
Kumbhakama, in his great splendour, said to Raghava : — 
" Take me not for Viradha, Kabanda or Khara, Bali or 
Maricha ; it is 1, Kumbhakama, who stand here ! Behold my 
dreadful and mighty mace wrought of iron ; with this, Devas 
and Danavas were formerly struck down by me ! Do not hold 
me in contempt in that I possess neither nose nor ears, 1 do not 
feel the least discomfort or pain on account of their loss ! 
Manifest the strength of thy limbs, OTiger among the Ikshvakus; 
186 
YUDDHA KM9DA 
having displayed thy prowess and might, I shall devour thee, O 
IrrepnwchabJe Prince 3 " 
Healing YflHi 3fK& th&tty ^ao» towcA one o£ \&& pWmtd 
arrows at Kumbhakarna that struck him with the force of 
lightning but that enemy of the Gods was neither shaken nor 
moved and those shafts, which had pierced seven Sala Trees 
and slain that bull among the monkeys, Bali, cut into the body 
of the titan that was as hard as a diamond. 
Then, as though they were drops of water, that enemy of the 
mighty Indra, drank up those arrows through his body, thus 
quenching their fury, whilst he whirled his mace in a fine frenzy. 
And that weapon covered with blood, the terror of the celestial 
hosts, brandished by that titan with formidable energy, created 
panic in the simian ranks. 
Then Rama, taking up another arrow named the Vayavya,1 
loosed it against that ranger of the night and cut off the arm with 
which he held the mace. With his arm severed, he let out a 
terrible cry and his arm, cut off by Raghava's shaft, fell with its 
mace, like unto the peak of a mountain on the army of the King 
of the Monkeys, crushing it. Thereafter, beside themselves, 
the monkeys who had escaped the massacre caused by that fall, 
their limbs lacerated, took refuge in the vicinity and became the 
witnesses of the terrific struggle between that Indra among men 
and the Prince of the Titans. 
His arm severed by that arrow, Kumbhakarna resembling 
the King of the Mountains its peak cloven by a great sword, 
struck down a tree with his remaining hand and rushed upon 
that lord of men, but Rama, with a shaft decorated with gold 
joined to Indra's weapon, cut off his upraised arm like the 
coiled body of a snake and the Tala Tree also. 
Beholding the titan with two arms severed who, roaring, was 
rushing upon him, Rama took out two whetted and crescent shaped arrows and severed his two feet, whereupon the interme diary regions, the four quarters, the caves of the mountain, 
the vast ocean, the City of Lanka and the ranks of the monkeys 
resounded with the thunder of bis fall. 
His arms and legs severed, that titan opened his mouth like 
Vadavamukha and suddenly rushed howling on Rama like 
1 Vayu's weapon. See glossary of weapons. 
187 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Rahu on the moon in the sky. Thereupon Rama filled his 
mouth with steel-pointed and plumed shafts decorated with 
gold and, with his mouth thus filled, he was unable to speak and, 
emitting inarticulated sounds with extreme difficulty, fell 
senseless. 
Thereupon Rama selected an arrow bright as the rays of the 
sun, which resembled the Rod of Brahma at the time of the 
final dissolution and was fatal to his foes, the weapon of Indra, 
well-plumed and sharpened, the rival of Maruta in speed, and 
Rama discharged that arrow, the shaft of which was admirably 
inlaid with diamonds and gold, brilliant as the flames of a blazing 
sun, swift as Mahendra's thunderbolt, against that ranger of the 
night. 
Loosed from Raghava's arm, that missile, which lit up the 
ten regions with its brilliance and which, in its formidable 
aspect, resembled a smokeless flame, struck that Prince of the 
Titans, the equal of Shakra and severed his head with its 
prominent teeth and swinging earrings, like unto the peak of a 
high mountain, as formerly Purandara severed the head of 
Vritra. The enormous head of Kumbhakarna with the curls 
that adorned it, looked like the moon floating in the sky at the 
time of the sun's rising, when the night has passed. Severed 
by Rama's shafts, the head of the titan resembling a mountain, 
fell on the earth crushing the highways, residences, gates and 
edifices of the city, bearing down the high walls also ; and that 
gigantic body of great resplendence belonging to the titan, fell 
into the sea where it crushed the great sharks, huge fishes and 
serpents, and plunged into the depths below. 
When Kumbhakarna, that great enemy of the brahmins and 
the Gods, was slain in combat, the earth shook as all the 
mountains also and the Celestials shouted for joy. Thereafter 
Gods, Rishis, Maharishis, Pannagas, Suras, Bhutas, Suparnas, 
Guhyakas and the hosts of Yakshas and Gandharvas, who 
ranged the skies, loudly extolled Rama's exploit. 
But on beholding that valiant Prince of the House of Raghu, 
the adherents and kinsfolk of the Lord of the Nairritas emitted 
loud cries at Kumbhakarna's fall, as do elephants in the presence 
of a lion. Having overcome Kumbhakarna in the field, Rama, 
amidst the simian host, resembled the sun emerging from the 
x88 
YUDDHA KANDA 
jaws of Rahu when it drives away the darkness from the 
celestial region. 
In their delight, the countless monkeys, whose faces resembled 
opening lotuses, lauded Prince Raghava, who saw the fulfilment 
of his desires in the death of his formidable adversary, and the 
elder brother of Bharata rejoiced that he had slain Kumbhakarna, 
the Scourge of the Gods, who had never been overcome in any 
great encounter, as the King of the Celestials rejoiced at the 
death of the great Asura, Vritra. 
chapter 68 
Havana weeps for Kumbhakarna 
Seeing Kumbhakarna fall under the blows of the exceedingly 
courageous Raghava, the titans brought the tidings to their 
King, Ravana, and said : — 
" O King, the rival of Kala is dead ! Having overthrown 
the monkey ranks and devoured the Plavagas, he, for a space, 
displayed his prowess which has now been extinguished by 
Rama's unconquerable strength and half his body lies submerged 
in the vast ocean. Streaming with blood, bis nose and ears 
severed, his head obstructing Lanka's gateway, he who resembled 
a mountain, Kumbhakarna, thy brother, struck down by 
Kakutstha's arrow, is now but a naked and mutilated corpse, 
like unto a tree consumed by fire ! " 
Hearing this report of the mighty Kumbhakarna's death on 
the battlefield, Ravana, overwhelmed with distress, swooned away. 
Learning that their paternal uncle had been slain, Devantaka, 
Karantaka, Trishiras and Atikaya, a prey to grief, groaned aloud, 
and Mahodara and Mahaparshwa, on hearing that their brother 
had perished under the blows of Rama of imperishable exploits, 
were seized with anguish. 
Thereafter, regaining his senses with extreme difficulty, that 
lion among the titans, tormented by the death of Kumbhakarna, 
his senses troubled, began to lament, saying : — 
" O Hero, O Humbler of the pride of thy foes, O Mighty 
Kumbhakarna, urged on by destiny, thou hast left me for the 
189 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
abode of death ! To go whither hast thou deserted me without 
having extracted that thorn from my side or from the side of my 
kinsfolk ? O Thou powerful warrior, destroyer of hostile 
ranks, from henceforth I no longer exist since I have lost my 
right arm, the support that delivered me from the fear of the Gods 
and Asuras. How has such a warrior, who quelled the pride 
of the Gods and Danavas, who resembled the Fire of Time, 
fallen to-day in the fight with Raghava? How has Rama 
been able, with a single arrow, to stretch thee on the ground, 
thou, whom the descent of the thunderbolt could not overwhelm? 
Seeing thee succumb in combat, the Hosts of the Gods, standing 
in the heavens with the Rishis, emit shouts of joy. Assuredly 
this very day the Plavamgamas, making use of a favourable 
occasion, will scale the gates and fortifications of Lanka on every 
side, which heretofore were impregnable ! I have no further 
need for a kingdom and what shall I do with Sita ? Bereft of 
Kumbhakarna, I no longer wish to live. Since I am unable to 
kill Raghava, the slayer of my brother in combat, would it not 
be better to die, for life is empty to me ? To-day I shall go 
where my brother has gone, nay, far from my brother I cannot 
live for an instant ! Witnessing my plight, the Gods, who were 
formerly wronged by me, will certainly mock me ! O 
Kumbhakarna, now that thou art dead, how shall I vanquish 
Indra ? Bibishana's prudent speech, that great soul whom I 
disregarded in my blindness, has proved true; the cruel end 
of Kumbhakarna and Frahasta has justified his words ! This 
is the disastrous consequence of that deed of mine, the banish ment of the virtuous and fortunate Bibishana." 
Such were the many burning lamentations to which the 
Ten-necked Ravana gave voice in the anguish of his soul on 
account of Kumbhakarna, his younger brother, the enemy of 
Indra, and, knowing him to have perished in combat, he swooned 
away. 
YUDDHA KANDA 
CHAPTER 69 
Narantaka is slain by Angada 
Hearing the lamentation of the wicked Ravana who was 
overcome with grief, Trishiras addressed him thus :— 
" O King, brave men do not give way to sorrow even at the 
death of so valiant a warrior as thy younger brother, our uncle. 
Since thou art able to conquer the Three Worlds, O Lord, 
why, like a common man, dost thou suffer thy courage to falter? 
Brahma bestowed on thee a spear, mail, a dart, a bow and a 
chariot harnessed to a thousand mules, sending forth a rumble 
like unto a thundercloud ; furnished with all these weapons, 
thou wilt vanquish Raghava ! Yet if it please thee, O Great 
Ring, I myself will descend into the arena and bear away thy 
foes, as Garuda the serpents. As Shambara fell under the blows 
of the King of the Gods and Naraka under those of Vishnu, so 
shall Rama fall this day, struck down by me on the battlefield." 
At these words of Trishiras, Ravana, the Lord of the Titans, 
under the sway of destiny, felt himself to be born anew and, 
hearing Trishiras speak thus, Devantaka, Narantaka and Atikaya, 
burning with martial ardour, desired nothing more than to enter 
into combat. "Away! Away!" roared those valiant sons of 
Ravana, the foremost of the Nairritas, the equals of Shakra in 
prowess. 
All were able to fly in the air, all were skilled in magic, all had 
humbled the pride of the Gods, all were invincible warriors, 
all were endowed with great strength, all enjoyed great renown, 
of none was it recounted that they had been defeated in battle 
even by the Gods, Gandharvas, Kinneras or great Serpents. 
All were expert in the use of weapons, all were courageous and 
able fighters, all were highly learned and all had been the 
recipients of great boons. 
Surrounded by his sons, the king, radiant as the solar orb, 
the destroyer of the power and glory of his foes, shone like 
Maghavat amidst the Gods, the humbler of the pride of the 
great Danavas. 
191 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Embracing bis sons, he covered them with ornaments and sent 
them out to fight, heaping blessings upon them. Nevertheless 
Ravana sent his brothers Yuddhonmatta and Matta to accompany 
those youthful warriors and watch over them in the struggle. 
Then those heroes of immense stature paid obeisance to the 
mighty Ravana, the destroyer of creatures, and, circumambula ting him, departed. Thereafter the foremost of the Nairritas, 
furnished with every kind of medicinal herb and perfume, went 
away, eager to fight, and Trishiras, Atikaya, Devantaka, 
Narantaka, Mahodara and Mahaparshwa, under the sway of 
destiny, set out. 
A magnificent elephant, like unto a dark cloud, offspring of 
Airavata's race, named Sudarshana, served as Mahodara's 
mount and that hero, furnished with every weapon, armed with 
a quiver, seated on his elephant, shone like the sun on the peak 
of the Astachala Mountain. 
Trishiras, born of Ravana, was seated in an excellent car 
drawn by the foremost of steeds and it was filled with weapons 
of every kind. Standing in his chariot, armed with his bow, he 
looked as resplendent as a storm cloud on the peak of a mountain, 
attended by lightning, thunder, meteors and Indra's bow.1 
With his iriple crown, Trishiras shone in his chariot like Himavat, 
the Lord of Mountains with its golden crests. 
Then the exceedingly war-like Atikaya, son unto that Lord 
of the Titans, most skilful of archers, ascended a superb chariot 
with excellent wheels, stout axles, magnificent steeds, carriage 
and yoke, rich in quivers and bows, filled with missiles, swords 
and maces, and that warrior wore a diadem encrusted with gold 
and covered with gems so that he looked like Mem shining in 
its own splendour. That mighty Prince of the Titans, surrounded 
by the foremost of the Nairritas, glowed in bis chariot like the 
God who bears the thunderbolt amidst the Immortals. 
And Narantaka, mounted on a white steed, as swift as thought, 
harnessed with gold, resembling Ucchairavas, was armed with a 
javelin like unto a thunderbolt and appeared exceedingly 
resplendent, resembling the illustrious Guha, the offspring of 
Shikhin riding on his peacock. 
Devantaka, bearing a gilded iron bar, looked like an incarnation 
1 Indra's bow — The Rainbow. 
192 
YUDDHA KANDA 
of Vishnu holding the Mandara Mountain in his arms and 
Mahaparshwa, full of strength and energy, brandished a mace 
like unto Kuvera armed for combat. 
Thereafter those intrepid warriors set out from Lanka like 
the Gods leaving Amaravati and powerful titans on elephants, 
horses and in chariots thundering like clouds, followed, armed 
with excellent weapons ; and those youthful beings shone like 
the blazing sun with their brows encircled with diadems, 
sparkling in splendour like planets flaming in the heavens and, 
in the brightness of the raiment in which they were attired, that 
brilliant cavalcade resembled an autumn cloud or a flock of 
cranes in the sky. 
Determined to die or vanquish their foe, they went forward 
in this courageous resolve, eager to fight, boasting, shouting 
and uttering threats, and those invincible heroes set out furnished 
with arrows amidst the clamour and clapping of hands, causing 
the earth to tremble as it were. 
As the roars of their troops seemed to rend the heavens, those 
mighty titan princes, full of joy, increased their pace and beheld 
the simian host brandishing rocks and trees, whilst from their 
side, the courageous leaders of the monkeys observed the titan 
army with its mass of elephants, horses and chariots advancing 
like unto a thunder cloud to the sound of hundreds of gongs 
and, furnished with huge weapons, encompassed on all sides 
by the resplendent Nairritas, resembling blazing torches or 
suns. 
Beholding that company approaching, the desire of the 
Plavamgamas was realised and, armed with huge rocks, they 
redoubled their cries in their eagerness to fight the titans, who 
responded with their shouts. Hearing the roars that the mon keys and their leaders let forth, the titan ranks, provoked by the 
joyous cheering of the enemy, roared with an even greater fury 
in their extreme valour. 
Thereafter, as they joined issue with that formidable host of 
titans, the monkeys with their leaders hurled themselves upon 
them, brandishing sharp rocks like unto mountains and those 
Plavamgamas, armed with crags and trees, threw themselves 
upon the titan forces, some fighting in the air and some on the 
ground. Some amongst those foremost of monkeys fought 
193 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
with heavily-branched trees and the struggle between the titans 
and the monkeys became desperate. 
Those monkeys of redoubtable courage let an unequalled 
shower of trees, stones and rocks fall on the enemy who over whelmed them with a hail of missiles. Titans and monkeys 
roared like lions on the battlefield ; the Plavamgamas crushed 
the Yatudhanas with blows from stones and, in fury struck those 
warriors covered in mail and jewels, mounted in chariots, and 
on elephants and horses in the fray. Then the Plavamgamas 
redoubled their attacks against the Yatudhanas with crags that 
they tore up with their hands. Their bodies tense, their eyes 
starting from their heads, shouting, they stumbled and fell, 
whilst those lions among the titans, on their side, pierced those 
elephants among the monkeys with sharp arrows, striking them 
with spears, mallets, swords, javelins and lances and they mowed 
each other down in their desire to triumph. The limbs of 
monkeys and titans were streaming with the blood of their 
enemies, and rocks and swords, thrown by the monkeys and 
titans, covered the blood-stained earth in an instant, so that the 
ground was smothered with titans like unto mountains, who, mad 
with martial ardour, had been crushed and mangled by their foes. 
Thereafter the monkeys, giving and receiving blows, their 
rocks shattered, engaged in a fresh and dreadful fight, using the 
severed limbs as weapons. And the Nairritas struck the monkeys 
with their own corpses and the apes struck the titans with the 
titan dead. Tearing the rocks from the hands of their foes, the 
titans broke them on the heads of the monkeys who shattered 
the arrows of the titans, using the pieces to destroy them. And 
they overwhelmed each other with crags in the battle and 
monkeys and titans set up a roaring like unto lions. 
Then, their armour and shields pierced, those titans, attacked 
by the monkeys, dripped blood as trees their sap, and some 
monkeys in the conflict, destroyed chariots with chariots, 
elephants with elephants, horses with horses, whilst the titans 
employed weapons like razors or half moons and Bhallas and 
pointed shafts in order to shatter the rocks and trees of those 
intrepid monkeys. In that encounter, the earth became im passable, covered as it was with monkeys and titans mangled and 
crushed under the rocks and trees in the fight. 
194 
YUDDHA KANDA 
Full of audacity and ardour, the monkeys, engaged in the 
struggle, casting aside all fear, fought the titans with a light 
heart and various kinds of weapons. 
Witnessing that appalling mfclee, the joy of the monkeys and 
the massacre of the titans, the great Rishis and hosts of Celestial 
Beings emitted shouts of triumph. 
Narantaka however, mounted on his steed, that was as swift 
as the wind, with a pointed lance plunged into the thick of the 
simian ranks like a fish into the sea and that warrior pierced 
seven hundred monkeys with his effulgent spear and that enemy 
of Indra, of exceeding courage, in an instant, single-handed, 
overthrew the army of the foremost of monkeys under the eyes 
of the Vidhyadharas and Maharishis, hacking a pathway for 
himself through the simian ranks, the bleeding flesh its mire, 
and which was covered with heaps of monkey corpses as high as 
hills. 
Whenever those lions among the monkeys sought to bar his 
way, so often did Narantaka cleave their ranks by mowing them 
down. As a fire burns up a forest, so did he consume those 
simian battalions and each time those inhabitants of the woods 
tore up the trees and rocks, they fell under his lance like moun tains riven by lightning. 
Brandishing his glittering spear in the forefront of battle, the 
valiant Narantaka ranged the entire welkin, overthrowing 
everything in his course as the wind in the rainy season and, 
whether they stayed at their post or went out to meet him, those 
courageous monkeys could neither stand against him nor escape 
from him so that all fell, pierced by that warrior. 
That unique javelin resembling Death itself,1 bright as the 
sun, was able, by itself, to destroy the ranks of the monkeys 
and leave them stretched on the earth, and the impact of that 
pike resembled the stroke of lightning so that the monkeys 
were unable to endure it and emitted loud cries. Those 
high-souled and intrepid monkeys, falling, resembled the 
peaks of mountains crumbling away, struck by lightning. 
Meanwhile the powerful leaders of the monkeys, who had 
previously been put to flight by Kumbhakarna, having regained 
their vigour, were ranged round Sugriva and he, looking about 
1 The Reaper Death. 
195 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
him, observed the army of the monkeys fleeing before Narantaka, 
terror-stricken and scattering in all directions. 
Witnessing this stampede, he beheld Narantaka, spear in 
hand, who was advancing, mounted on his steed. At this, the 
illustrious Sugriva, King of the Monkeys, addressed the youthful 
Prince Angada, a warrior whose valour equalled Shakra's, and 
said: — 
" Go out against that bold titan, who, riding on a horse, is 
consuming the army I have sent against him and speedily 
deprive him of his life's breaths." 
At this command from his sovereign, the intrepid Angada, 
the foremost of monkeys resembling a rocky mass, broke away 
from that company like the sun emerging from a cloud and, with 
the bracelets he wore, he glittered like a mountain with its 
metallic veins. Without any weapons save his nails and teeth, 
that son of Bali, in his great strength, rushed out to meet 
Narantaka and said to him : — 
" Why dost thou strive with common monkeys ? Do thou 
with thy spear, the impact of which is equal to lightning, strike 
my breast which I now present to thee ! " 
The words of Angada, son of Bali, angered Narantaka, who 
bit his lip with his teeth hissing like a serpent, and hurled 
himself upon him in fury. Brandishing his spear, which 
glittered like fire, he struck at Angada but the weapon broke 
against the breast of that son of Bali, that was as hard as diamond, 
and fell to the earth. 
Seeing his lance shattered, like a snake whose powerful coils 
are sundered by Suparna, the son of Bali raised his hand and 
struck the head of the steed of his adversary. Sinking to its 
knees, its eyeballs starting from their sockets, its tongue hanging 
out, that horse, as high as a hill, fell to the earth, its head crushed 
by the blow from the palm of his hand. 
Then Narantaka, beholding his steed lying dead, grew enraged 
and, clenching his fist, struck the son of Bali on the forehead 
with energy so that the hot blood gushed forth from -his injured 
brow. Now he flared up with wrath and then swooned away 
and, having lost consciousness awhile, on coming to himself 
was confused. 
Thereafter Angada, Bali's mighty son, clenching his fist, 
196 
YUDDHA KANDA 
which equalled Mrityu's in strength and resembled a great rock, 
brought it down on Narantaka's breast. 
His chest crushed, broken by the shock, vomiting flames, his 
limbs streaming with blood, Narantaka fell on the earth like a 
mountain struck by lightning : and when the mighty Narantaka 
fell in the struggle with Bali's son, from the sky, the foremost 
of the Celestials and the monkeys emitted a great shout of 
triumph ! And Angada filled Rama's heart with joy and he was 
astonished at his exceedingly difficult achievement. Thereafter 
that warrior of illustrious exploits eagerly prepared for fresh 
encounters. 
chapter 70 
The Death of Devantaka, Trishiras, Mahodara and Mahaparshwa 
Seeing that Narantaka was slain, those lions among the 
Nairritas, Devantaka, Trishiras and Mahodara, the son of 
Poulastya, wept bitterly. 
Thereafter Mahodara, mounted on that Indra of elephants 
like unto a cloud, rushed impetuously on the exceedingly 
energetic son of Bali 
Then the valiant Devantaka, distressed on account of the 
calamity that had visited his brother, arming himself with a 
formidable mace, also ran on Angada and, in his turn, the 
energetic Trishiras, standing in his chariot, that was as bright as 
the sun and harnessed to excellent steeds, advanced on the son 
of Bali. 
Attacked by three of the foremost of titans, who had humbled 
the pride of the Gods, Angada tore up a many-branched tree, 
and as Shakra his flaming thunderbolt, hurled that huge trunk 
with its immense branches at Devantaka. Thereupon Trishiras 
severed it with his arrows which resembled venomous snakes 
and Angada, beholding the tree shattered, darted forward and 
that elephant among monkeys caused a shower of trees and rocks 
to fall upon the titans. 
Enraged, Trishiras broke them with his whetted shafts and, 
with the head of his mace, Mahodara crushed them, while 
o 197 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Trishiras pursued the valiant Angada with his darts. Thereafter 
Mahodara urged his elephant to advance on the son of Bali 
and, in his anger, pierced his breast with Tomaras that were 
equal to lightning} and Devantaka, provoked, approaching 
Angada, struck him with his mace and swiftly turned away. The 
combined assault of those three Nairritas left that illustrious 
warrior unmoved; that agile and invincible hero however hurled 
himself in great fury on the colossal elephant belonging to 
Mahodara and, with the palm of his hand, struck it down. 
Its eyes starting from their sockets, the elephant fell dead and 
that powerful son of Bali tore out one of its tusks, thereafter, 
rushing on Devantaka, he dealt him a blow in that struggle 
which caused him to stumble like a tree buffeted by the wind, 
and he vomited blood profusely which was the colour of lac. 
Breathing with difficulty, the energetic and mighty Devantaka, 
brandishing his mace, struck Angada a violent blow. At 
the impact, the son of that Indra among Monkeys fell to his 
knees but soon rose up again and, as he did so, Trishiras, with 
three infallible and formidable darts, pierced that son of the 
simian king. 
Meanwhile Hanuman and Nila, beholding Angada assaulted 
by three of the foremost of the titans, came to his aid, and Nila 
struck Trishiras with a rock which the skilful son of Ravana 
broke with his sharp darts. Shattered by a hundred arrows, 
its surface broken to pieces, that rocky peak, from which sparks 
and flames spurted, fell. 
Witnessing their astonishment, the courageous Devantaka, 
full of joy, in the fight flung himself with his mace on the son of 
Maruta and, as he rushed upon him, that lion among the monkeys 
leapt to meet him and with his fist struck hir" a thunderous blow 
on the head. Thereafter the heroic son of Vayu, that great 
and powerful monkey, battered in his skull and his roaring 
caused the titans to tremble. Devantaka, the son of the King of 
the Titans, gasping from the blow, his skull shattered, his teeth 
protruding, his eyes starting from their sockets, his tongue 
hanging out, fell to the earth instantly bereft of life. 
Enraged by the death of the foremost of the titan warriors, that 
mighty enemy of the Gods, Trishiras, let fall a fearful shower of 
whetted shafts on Nila's breast and Mahodara, in fury, quickly 
198 
YUDDHA KANDA 
mounted a second elephant as high as a bill. As the sun scales 
the Mandara Mountain, so did he let fall a rain of arrows on 
Nila as, under a rainbow, a cloud lets loose a shower on a moun tain amidst the muttering of thunder. Covered with those darts, 
with which the valiant titan overwhelmed him, the leader of the 
monkey army, his limbs pierced, faltering, swooned away; then 
coming to himself, Nila tore up a rock covered with many branched trees and, with a terrific bound leapt on Mahodaia and 
struck him on the head. Crushed by the impact with which that 
elephant among monkeys had just overwhelmed him, Mahodara 
fell to earth deprived of life, like a rock riven by lightning. 
Beholding his uncle shun, Trishiras seized hold of his bow and, 
full of ire, pierced Hanuman with his sharp arrows. Thereupon 
the son of the Wind, provoked, flung a crag at the valiant 
Trishiras who broke it to pieces with his whetted shafts. Seeing 
that his missile was useless, the monkey let fall a rain of trees 
on the son of Ravana in the snuggle and he, observing that 
shower of trees falling through the air upon him, severed them 
in fury with his sharp arrows, emitting shouts of triumph. Then 
Hanuman, leaping upon his steed, tore at it violently with his 
nails, as the King of the Beasts claws a great elephant. 
Thereafter, from his side, the son of Ravana, as Death with 
his noose, arming himself with a spear hurled himself on the 
son of Anila. As a meteor falls from the skies, so did that lance 
descend unobstructed and that lion among the monkeys caught 
it and snapped it, emitting a great shout. 
Beholding that weapon of formidable aspect destroyed by 
Hanuman, the monkey forces raised joyful roars like unto the 
rumble of thunder, and Trishiras, the foremost of the titans, 
drawing his sword, pierced the breast of that Indra of the 
Monkeys. 
Wounded by the thrust of his sword, the mighty Hanuman, 
born of Maruta, struck that Three-headed One on the breast 
with the palm of his hand. Smitten by the blow from 
Hanuman 's palm, the illustrious Trishiras let his gauntlet fall 
and dropped swooning to the ground, and as he fell, the great 
monkey, who resembled a mountain, broke bis sword letting 
out a roar which struck terror in all the titans. Unable to endure 
the terrible cry of triumph, that ranger of the night rose up 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
and struck Hanuman with his fist. The blow infuriated the 
great monkey who, in anger, seized hold of the titan by his 
crown and, as formerly Shakra severed the head of Tashtri's 
son,1 so Hanuman, with a terrific stroke of his sharp sword, cut 
off his three heads each encircled with a diadem and decorated 
with earrings. The heads of that enemy of Indra with their 
large eyes resembling stones, their glances like unto a glowing 
brazier, fell to the earth like stars falling from the sky. When 
the enemy of the Gods, Trishiras was slain by Hanuman, who 
was equal to Shakra in valour, the monkeys shouted in triumph 
and the earth shook, whilst the titans scattered on all sides. 
Beholding Trishiras, Yuddhonmatta and the irresponsible 
Devantaka and Narantaka slain, the fury of Matta knew no 
bounds. Seizing a mace, plated with gold, stained with flesh, 
blood and foam, immense, glittering, saturated with the enemy's 
gore, its point effulgent, festooned with scarlet garlands, the 
terror of Airavata, Mahapadma and Sarvabhauma,e he armed 
himself with that weapon. In his fury, Matta, that lion among 
the titans, scattered the monkeys tike the Fire at the end of the 
World Period. 
Meanwhile the monkey, Rishabha, rushed towards Mattanika,3 
the younger brother of Ravana, and stood courageously facing 
him. Beholding that monkey, as high as a hill, standing before 
him, Matta, enraged, struck him violently on the chest with his 
mace that resembled lightning. Under the impact of that 
weapon, the lion among monkeys, his chest riven, stumbled, 
blood flowing in streams from the wound. Regaining conscious ness after a long time, that prince of the monkeys, his lips 
trembling, threw a savage glance at Mahaparshwa and, with a 
bound, hurled himself on that titan ; thereafter the impetuous 
leader of the intrepid monkeys, of the size of a mountain in 
stature, clenched his fist and struck him full on the chest and, 
tike a tree whose roots have been severed, the titan suddenly 
fell to the earth, his limbs streaming with blood. Thereupon, 
Rishabha, tore that terrible mace which resembled the Rod of 
Death, from his grasp, shouting in triumph. For an instant 
1 Tashtri's son. The son of Vishvanipa. 
* The Elephants supporting the Quarters. 
* Another name of Matta. 
YUDDHA KANDA 
that enemy of the Gods appeared to be dead but, regaining his 
senses, his colour that of an evening cloud, he threw himself 
on the son of the Lord of Waters and struck him. 
Dazed by the shock, the monkey sank to the ground, but, 
having regained consciousness, quickly rose again, and, brandish ing the mace resembling a huge rock, he struck the titan a violent 
blow. When that terrible mace fell on the powerful breast of 
the enemy of the Gods, hostile to sacrifice and the priests, from 
bis riven breast, blood fell in torrents, as mineral-charged waters 
flow from a mountain. Thereafter Rishabha, still armed with 
that formidable weapon, advanced upon him rapidly, striking 
bis mighty adversary again and again and that hero felled 
Mattanika in the forefront of the battle and, crushed by his own 
mace, his teeth and eyes pressed in, Matta sank to the earth 
bereft of life and strength like a rock shattered by lightning. 
At his fall, all those titan warriors fled and, Ravana's brother 
being slain, the whole army of the Nairritas, which was as vast 
as the sea, throwing away their weapons, seeking only to preserve 
their lives, scattered in all directions like the sea bursting its 
banks. 
CHAPTER 71 
Lakshmana slays the Titan Atikaya 
Witnessing the rout of his great army, causing the hair to stand 
on end, and the death of his brothers the equals of Shakra in 
prowess and, beholding his two uncles Yuddhonmatta and 
Matta, the foremost of the titans, struck down in the fight, 
the illustrious Atikaya, who resembled a rock, the humbler 
of the pride of Devas and Danavas, he who had been favoured 
by Brahma, fell into a transport of rage. 
Ascending his chariot, glittering like a hundred suns, that 
enemy of Indra hurled himself on the monkeys and, stretching 
his bow, that titan, wearing a diadem and adorned with sparkling 
earrings, proclaimed his name, emitting a tremendous shout. 
The proclaiming of his name, the leonine roar and the fearful 
twanging of his bow-string struck terror in those monkeys and 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
they, beholding that gigantic warrior, reflected : — ' Kumbha karn a 
has come again ' and, in their panic, took shelter one with the 
other. At the sight of that apparition, like unto Vishnu taking 
the three strides, the simian warriors, seized with fear, fled in 
all directions and in the presence of Atikaya, those monkeys, 
bewildered, sought refuge with the one who is the refuge of all, 
die elder brother of Lakshmana. 
At that instant, Kakutstha beheld the titan, like unto a 
mountain, standing in his chariot, afar off, armed with a bow 
and roaring like a cloud at the time of the dissolution of the 
worlds. Seeing that monster, Raghava, struck with astonish ment, re-assuring the monkeys, enquired of Bibishana, saying: — 
" Who is that archer, as high as a hill, with yellow eyes, 
standing in his vast chariot, harnessed to a thousand horses 
amidst sharp picks, javelins, gleaming and pointed darts, who 
shines like Maheshwara among the Bhutas and who is surrounded 
by guttering spears that fill his car like tongues of the Fire of 
Death, blazing like a cloud riven by lightning, his best and 
golden-backed bow illumining his marvellous car on all sides, as 
Shakra in the heavens? This tiger among titans diffuses a 
brilliant light over the battlefield as he, the prince of warriors, 
advances in a chariot reflecting the sun's rays. On the point 
of his standard, Rahu has lent him his splendour1 and his 
arrows like unto the rays of the sun light up the ten regions ; 
his triply-curved bow, inlaid and backed with gold, resounding 
like thunder, is as resplendent as Shatakratu's ! With its 
standard, banner, carriage and the four outriders who escort it, 
that vast chariot thunders like a storm cloud. Eight and 
thirty quivers lie in the car with dreadful bows furnished with 
yellow cords ! Two shining swords illumine its sides, their 
hafts measuring four palms and they are assuredly ten palms 
in length. With his red garlands, this hero of the size of a 
mountain, dark of hue, his great mouth like unto death, resembles 
the sun veiled by cloud ! Who is this titan leader with his arms 
loaded with golden bracelets ? " 
Thus questioned by Rama, the descendant of Raghu of 
immense energy, the extremely illustrious Bibishana answered: — 
" It is the valiant son of that king who is without equal in 
1 Rahu being his emblem. 
YUDDHA KANDA 
might, Dasbagriva of great splendour, the younger brother of 
Vaishravana of terrible exploits, the mighty Ravana, Lord of the 
Titans. Full of reverence for his elders, renowned for his 
strength, the most skilful of those versed in the science of arms, 
he is able to fight on horseback or on the back of an elephant, 
either with a spear or bow and, whether it be a question of 
destruction or of sowing dissension or of making peace, of 
bestowing gifts, of using diplomacy or of strategy, he is highly 
esteemed. His mother was Dhanyamalini and he is named 
Atikaya. 
" Having found favour with Brahma through his chastity and 
austerity, he has obtained possession of marvellous weapons 
with which he has overcome his enemies and Swyambhu granted 
him invulnerability to Gods and Danavas and bestowed this 
celestial armour on him and a chariot reflecting the sun's rays. 
A hundred times has he triumphed over Gods and Danavas, 
rescued the titans and exterminated the Yakshas. In battle, 
that intrepid warrior stayed Indra's thunderbolt with his darts 
and repelled the noose belonging to the Lord of the Waters, 
Varuna. He, Atikaya, the most powerful of the titans is the 
intelligent son of Ravana and the subduer of the pride of Devas 
and Danavas. Speedily direct thine efforts against him, O 
Lion among Men, lest, with his arrows, he annihilate the 
monkey race ! " 
At that instant, the mighty Atikaya, shouting again and again, 
stretching his bow, hurled himself on the monkey host. 
Beholding that fearful monster, standing in his chariot, the 
greatest of car warriors, the foremost of the illustrious monkey 
leaders advanced to meet him, and Kumuda, Mainda, Nila and 
Sharabha, corning together, also went out with trees and rocks. 
Then that mighty titan, prince of warriors, broke those rocks 
and trees and all the monkeys resisted him, but that virtuous 
hero of appalling stature, pierced them with iron darts. Over whelmed by that hail of missiles, their limbs dislocated, 
demoralized, they were unable to endure the furious assaults of 
Atikaya and that hero sowed terror amidst the hosts of the 
valiant monkeys, as a lion, proud of its youth and strength, 
stands amongst a herd of deer ; nevertheless that Indra among 
the titans desisted from striking any who were defenceless. 
203 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Thereafter with his bow and quiver, be rushed on Rama and 
addressed him proudly, saying : — 
*' Here I stand in my chariot with my bow and arrows in my 
hand ! I do not contend with common soldiers but he, who 
desires it and is willing, I challenge, here and now, to combat ! " 
This speech incensed Saumitri, the slayer of his foes, and, 
in his rage, he sprang forward with a smile of disdain, bow in 
hand. Provoked, he advanced, taking an arrow from his quiver 
and placing himself before Atikaya, stretching his great bow so 
that the earth, the sky, the sea and the four quarters resounded 
with the formidable thrumming of the bowstring and terror 
seized those rangers of the night. 
Hearing that dreadful twanging of Saumitri's bow, the 
powerful and valiant son of that Indra of Titans was astounded 
and, enraged on beholding Lakshmana advancing towards him, 
he took out a sharp dart and spoke thus : — 
" Go hence, O Saumitri, thou art but a child without any 
experience of warfare ; why dost thou seek to measure thy 
strength with mine, who am the equal of Death ! Nay, 
assuredly the force of these arrows loosed by mine arm may not 
be withstood by Himavat himself nor the earth nor the heavens. 
Thou art seeking to rouse the Fire of Dissolution which, to thy 
good fortune, is now sleeping. Throw away thy bow and go 
hence ! Do not sacrifice thy life by advancing to meet me ! 
Nevertheless if thou art determined not to turn back then stay 
and, yielding up thy life, enter Yama's abode ! Behold my 
whetted shafts, which wroughtof refined gold, subdue the boasting 
of mine adversaries and resemble Shiva's trident. This arrow 
also, resembling a serpent, shall this instant quaff thy blood as 
the king of the beasts drinks the blood of the lord of the 
elephants. " 
Speaking thus, in rage, the titan placed an arrow on his bow 
and that speech of Atikaya's,fuH of wrath and threats, infuriated 
Lakshmana who was brave and virtuous by nature so that 
he answered him proudly and with dignity, saying : — 
" Superiority is not measured by speech nor is bragging 
indulged in by men of worth ! Here I am armed with my bow, 
an arrow in mine hand, manifest thy prowess, O Wretch I 
Reveal thyself in deeds and cease to blow thine own trumpet ! 
304 
YUDDHA KANDA 
He who conducts himself with courage is said to be a warrior ! 
Thou art furnished with every kind of weapon* art mounted on 
thy chariot and hast a bow ; now manifest thy valour either 
with arrows or with magic darts ! I shall cut off thine head 
with my whetted shafts as the wind detaches the ripe fruit of the 
palm from its stem ! Soon mine arrows, decorated with refined 
gold, shall drink thy blood, that their points will cause to flow by 
piercing thy limbs. Thou hast said ' He is but a child ' but 
let not this thought cause thee to underestimate me. Old or 
young, know that it is death who is about to enter into combat 
with thee. Vishnu, while yet a child, covered the Three 
Worlds in his three strides ! " 
These words of Lakshmana, fraught with sense and reason, 
exasperated Atikaya, who laid hold of an excellent dart. At 
this, Vidyadharas, Bhutas, Devas, Daityas, Maharishis and 
Guhyakas of great soul, gathered to witness the duel. 
Thereafter Atikaya, provoked, placed an arrow on his bow 
and loosed it on Lakshmana and it ate up space, as it were, 
but that sharpened arrow like unto a venomous snake, in the 
form of a crescent, as it flew was severed by that slayer of his 
foes and, seeing his dart broken, Atikaya, in a paroxysm of 
rage took out five arrows at once, and that ranger of the night 
loosed them on Lakshmana, but before they reached him, the 
younger brother of Bharata shattered them with his whetted 
shafts. 
Having severed those missiles with his sharpened darts, 
Lakshmana, the slayer of his foes, selected a pointed arrow, the 
brilliance of which sent forth flames and placed it on his excellent 
bow, then bending it with force, he struck the forehead of that 
prince of the titans. 
That shaft, sinking into the brow of the terrible titan with the 
blood that covered it, resembled the King of the Serpents 
entering a mountain and, as the formidable gateway of Tripura 
shook, when struck by Rudra's shaft, so did that titan falter 
at the impact of Lakshmana's weapon. Breathing heavily, that 
colossus reflected * Assuredly the arrow thus loosed proves to 
me that thou art a worthy adversary ! * Thinking thus, he 
opened his mouth and, stretching his great arms, leaning on his 
seat, urged his chariot forward. 
»5 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
One, three, five and seven were the arrows selected by that 
lion among the titans and, placing them on his bow and drawing 
it, he let them fly and those shafts, bright as the sun, seemed as 
it were to set the firmament ablaze. Meantime, unmoved, the 
younger brother of Raghava severed them with the aid of 
innumerable whetted darts. Seeing those arrows broken, the 
son of Ravana, enemy of the Lord of the Gods, incensed, took 
hold of a sharp weapon and, placing it on his bow, he loosed it 
with great force against Saumitri, who was advancing towards 
him, striking him on the breast. Wounded in the breast by 
Atikaya, Saumitri began to bleed profusely, like an elephant 
discharging its temporal juices, and that prince plucked out the 
shaft and threw it away ; thereafter he selected a sharp dart to 
which he joined a mantra-charged arrow and set Agni's weapon 
on his bow whereupon both bow and arrow spat forth flames. 
Thereupon Atikaya, endowed with great strength, took up 
Rudra's weapon and fixed an arrow with a golden haft, re sembling a serpent, on his bow. 
Then Lakshmana loosed that powerful weapon, his flaming 
and redoubtable missile on Atikaya like Antaka wielding the 
Rod of Death. Seeing that shaft joined to the Agneya dart 
the Ranger of the Night loosed Rudra's shaft joined to Surya's 
weapon, and those two missiles rushed towards each other in 
space and their flaming points made them appear like infuriated 
serpents. Devouring each other, they fell on the earth, their 
fire extinguished, reduced to ashes and bereft of their splendour, 
and having set the sky ablaze, they lay without lustre on the 
earth. 
Thereafter Atikaya, enraged, discharged the Aishika Reed 
joined to Twashtar's Weapon, but the mighty Saumitri severed 
it with Indra's shaft. Seeing the reed broken, that prince born 
of Ravana, enraged, joined a spear to Yama's Weapon and that 
ranger of the night hurled it at Lakshmana who destroyed it 
with the Vayavya Weapon. 
Then, like a mass of cloud letting loose its rain, Lakshmana, 
in anger, covered the son of Ravana with a rain of missiles and 
those shafts coming in contact with Atikaya's coat of mail which 
was encrusted with diamonds, had their points shattered and 
fell on the earth. Seeing them rendered fruitless Lakshmana, 
206 
YUDDHA KANDA 
the slayer of hostile warriors, covered his adversary with a 
thousand arrows. Inundated by that hail of shafts, Atikaya, 
that mighty warrior, whose cuirass could not be pierced, 
remained unmoved and that hero was unable to inflict a wound 
on the titan. 
Thereafter the Wind-god approached him and said : — 
" Because of the boon received from Brahma, that warrior is 
clothed in impenetrable armour, do thou therefore strike him 
with the Brahma Weapon, else he may not be slain, his mail 
being proof against aught else ! " 
On hearing Vayu's words, Saumitri, the equal of Indra in 
prowess, instantly took up a dart of incredible velocity and 
joined it to Brahma's Weapon. Having placed that excellent 
weapon with the foremost of arrows furnished with sharp points 
on his bow, every region, the sun, moon and the great planets were 
struck with terror and the heavens and earth also shook. Then, 
having fixed the Brahma Weapon on his bow, that missile, the 
stem of which being like death's messenger and equal to lightning, 
Saumitri let it fly on the son of Indra's foe. And Atikaya 
beheld that shaft loosed by the mighty-armed Lakshmana, 
swift as the tempest, with its haft encrusted with gold and 
diamonds, falling upon him and beholding it, immediately 
struck at it with his innumerable shafts but that arrow, swift 
as Suparna himself, flew towards him with extreme velocity and 
seeing it draw near, like Death at the time of dissolution, 
Atikaya struck at it with lances, spears, maces, axes, picks and 
arrows with unrelenting energy, but those weapons of marvellous 
aspect were rendered fruitless by that flaming dart, which, 
striking him, severed his head with its diadem. 
Cut off by Lakshmana's arrow, the head instantly fell on the 
earth with its crown like unto the peak of Himavat. Then 
those rangers of the night, who had escaped the slaughter, 
beholding the body lying on the ground, its raiment and adorn ments in disarray, were thunderstruck and, their features 
distored, those unfortunate beings, exhausted with fighting, 
suddenly began to emit piercing and inarticulate cries. There after those titans, who surrounded their dead leader, terrified, 
without paying him honour, fled towards the city. 
The monkeys, however, their faces shining like full-blown 
207 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
lotuses, in their delight, all paid homage to Lakshmana on 
account of the success he had won in striking down that 
formidable adversary who was renowned for his prowess and 
theretofore invincible. 
CHAPTER 72 
Ravana, overcome by anxiety, makes further Plans 
Hearing that Atikaya had been slain by the mighty Lakshmana, 
Ravana became extremely anxious and spoke as follows : — 
" Dhumraksha, who is full of ardour and the most skilled in 
the use of arms, Akampana, Prahasta, and Kumbhakarna, those 
valiant titan warriors eager for combat, the destroyers of hostile 
forces, ever invincible, brave titans of immense stature who were 
versed in the use of every weapon, have fallen with their troops 
under the blows of Rama of imperishable exploits. Yet many 
powerful warriors were struck down by my son Indrajita, who 
is renowned for his strength and prowess ; those two brothers 
were fettered by his formidable shafts bestowed on us as a boon. 
All the Gods and Asuras combined, despite their power, could 
not have broken those fearful bonds, nor the Yakshas, Gand harvas or Pannagas ! I do not know by what force, magic or 
supernatural means, those bonds were severed by those two 
brothers, Rama and Lakshmana. 
" Those courageous titans, who went out to fight at my 
command, have all perished in combat with the exceedingly 
valiant monkeys. Henceforth I do not see who, on the battle field, will be able to slay Rama and Lakshmana or the powerful 
Sugriva and his forces. 
" Ah ! How mighty is Rama ! How great is the range of his 
shafts! Those titans, who challenged this warrior, have all 
been destroyed ! Now, on bis account, let defences be set up 
everywhere, both in the city and round the Ashoka Grove where 
Sita is being guarded. Let the entries and exits be patrolled 
continuously by our sentinels, wherever they are posted ! 
Establish yourselves with the foremost battalions everywhere 
208 
YUDDHA KANDA 
in order to observe the movements of the monkeys, O Night rangers ! In the evening, at midnight or at dawn, no matter 
when, do not relax your vigilance in regard to the simian army. 
Observe what troops are placed in the line by the enemy, how 
they advance and where they halt ; let the gateways and turrets 
be barricaded at once ! " 
All the titans listened to the commands of the mighty Lord 
of the Titans and went away to carry them out. Ravana, the 
King of the Titans, however, having issued these orders, 
exceedingly despondent, entered his abode, the fire of his anger 
smouldering within him, and that powerful monarch of those 
rangers of the night, reflecting on the misfortune that had 
befallen his son, sighed without ceasing. 
chapter 73 
Indrajita making Himself invisible puts the Monkey Army out of 
action 
The titans, who had escaped the slaughter, hastened to apprise 
Ravana of the death of their leaders, Devantaka and others, as 
also Trishiras and Atikaya. 
Hearing these mournful tidings, great tears immediately filled 
the king's eyes and for a long time he remained absorbed in 
the melancholy thought of the death of his sons and brothers. 
Beholding the wretched monarch plunged in an ocean of 
grief, Indrajita the son of that Lord of the Titans, the foremost 
of warriors, addressed him thus : — 
" O My Dear Father, since Indrajita still lives, do not give 
thyself up to despair ! O Prince of the Nairritas, he whom the 
enemy of Indra strikes with his shafts in the fight is not able 
to preserve his life. To-day thou shalt see Rama and Laksh mana lying stretched on the earth, their bodies pierced, torn 
to pieces by mine arrows, their limbs riddled with my whetted 
shafts. Bear witness to the well-considered vow of Shakra's 
enemy re-inforced by my prowess and the divine power ! 
This very day I shall overwhelm Rama and Lakshmana with 
ao9 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
arrows that never miss their target. Let Indra, Vaivasvata, 
Vishnu, Rudra, the Sadhyas, Vaishvanara, Chandra and Surya 
this day witness mine immeasurable piowess as redoubtable 
as that of Vishnu at Bali's place of sacrifice ! " 
Having spoken thus, that rival of the Lord of the Celestials, 
craved permission of the king to depart and with fearless soul 
ascended his chariot, that was as swift as the wind, harnessed 
to excellent steeds and furnished with weapons, resembling 
the car of Hari himself. Then he set out for the battlefield 
immediately and that magnanimous hero was escorted by 
innumerable warriors, full of ardour, bearing great bows in 
their hands. 
As they advanced, some on the backs of elephants, others 
on prodigious mounts such as tigers, scorpions, cats, mules, 
buffalo, serpents, boars, cheetahs, lions and jackals, as large as 
hills, crows, herons and peacocks, those titans of redoubtable 
courage were armed with javelins, hammers, sabres, axes and 
maces. To the sound of conches and the rolling of drums, 
that valiant enemy of the King of the Gods rushed out to fight. 
With his parasol, pearly like the moon, that slayer of his foes 
shone like the firmament when that orb is full. Fanned by 
marvellous chowries with elegant handles, that warrior, adorned 
with golden ornaments, the foremost of archers, Indrajita, blazed 
like the solar disc and he, whose strength was irresistible, 
illumined Lanka like the burning sun in the sky. Then that 
intrepid subduer of bis foes, on reaching the battlefield, ranged 
the titans round his chariot and, according to the traditional 
rites, that Prince of the Titans prayed to the God who feeds 
on sacrificial offerings,1 whose brilliance he possessed, reciting 
the most auspicious mantras, and, offering libations of Soma 
and roasted grain, with garlands and perfumes, that resplendent 
leader of the titans invoked Pavaka. 
Thereafter he brought there weapons such as Sharapatras, 
Samidhs and Bibhitakas with red robes and an iron spoon and, 
heaping the fire with Sharapatras and Tomaras, he seized hold 
of a live goat by the neck. 
Blazing up suddenly the fire gave off no smoke but manifested 
the signs betokening victory and, having been lit, the flames 
1 The God of Fire, Pavaka or Agni. 
2X0 
YUDDHA KANDA 
bright as gold, whirling in a southerly direction, passed through 
the crucible and instantly consumed the offerings. 
Thereafter Indrajita, who was skilled in handling arms, took 
out the Brahma-weapon and pronounced a mantram on his bow, 
his chariot and on all. Then he, having uttered the sacred 
formula and invoked Pavaka, the firmament, the sun, the planets, 
the moon and the stars, trembled. Having called on the God of 
Fire, whose brilliance he possessed, he, the equal of Indra in 
power, whose strength was unimaginable, disappeared in the sky 
with his bow, arrows, sword, chariot, horses and spear. 
Then the army of titans, abundantly furnished with horses 
and chariots, flags and pennants, burning to fight, set out 
emitting war cries and, in the struggle, those titans, full of rage, 
attacked the monkeys with darts of different kinds which were 
sharp, swift and beautifully wrought, and with spears and hooks. 
Beholding them, the son of Ravana, addressing those rangers of 
the night, cried out : — " Attack the foe speedily whom you are 
burning to destroy ! Be of good cheer ! " 
At these words, the titans, in their anxiety to triumph, roared 
aloud and caused a hail of missiles to descend on those re doubtable monkeys. Arming himself with arrows,1 maces and 
clubs, Indrajita, on his side, in the midst of the titans, assaulted 
the monkeys from where he stood invisible in the sky. 
Then those monkeys, struck down in the fight, instantly began 
to assail Ravani with blows from stones and trees and, full of 
anger, Indrajita, born of Ravana, that hero full of power, smote 
the monkeys with a single lance and, in fierce fury, pierced five, 
seven and nine monkeys at one time to the great delight of the 
titans. Thereafter that invincible warrior crushed those 
monkeys under his shafts that glittered like the sun and were 
decorated with gold. 
Their limbs pierced, the monkeys, overwhelmed by those 
arrows, fell like great Asuras destroyed by the Gods. Before 
this second Aditya who consumed them with those formidable 
weapons as his rays, those lions among the monkeys fled away, 
filled with terror. Their bodies mutilated, their senses confused, 
they stampeded, bathed in blood and terrified but, in their 
1 Different kinds of arrows such as Nalikas and Navachas. See Weapons 
Glossary. 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
devotion to Rama, those monkeys, willing to sacrifice their lives. 
suddenly halted and returned shouting, armed with rocks, 
and, closing their ranks, showered down a hail of trees, crags and 
stones on Ravani. 
That murderous and fearful avalanche of trees and rocks was 
however dispersed by the mighty Indrajita, who was ever 
victorious in combat and, with his arrows as bright as fire, 
resembling serpents, that prince pierced the ranks of his foes. 
With eighteen penetrating darts he wounded Gandhamadana ; 
with nine others he struck Nala, who stood some way off, and, 
in his great strength, he assailed Mainda with seven arrows, 
tearing out his entrails, and Gaja with seven blunted shafts. 
Thereafter he pierced Jambavan with ten arrows, Nila with 
thirty and Sugriva, Rishabha, Angada and Dvivida with dreadful 
flaming arrows that had been received as boons, thus rendering 
those foremost of the monkeys insensible, who, struck by 
innumerable shafts fell under his furious onslaught so that he 
appeared like the Fire of Death itself. 
With the aid of arrows as bright as the sun, loosed with skill, 
that were exceedingly swift, he scattered those monkey divisions 
in that great fight and, with transports of the keenest joy, that 
renowned warrior, born of the Indra of the Titans, witnessed 
the entire simian army, bathed in blood, overwhelmed with that 
rain of missiles. 
Under that shower of arrows and cruel hail of weapons with 
which he assailed them, the valiant Indrajita ranged the monkey 
ranks spreading destruction. Then, leaving his army behind, 
he speedily flung himself on the monkey forces in that great 
fight, covering them with a huge wave of formidable shafts like 
the downpour from a dark cloud. 
Victims of his magic arts, their bodies crushed by those missiles 
loosed by that vanquisher of Shakra, the monkeys, who were as 
large as rocks, emitted piteous cries, falling in the fray like great 
hills struck by Indra's thunderbolt, and they could see nothing 
but those sharp arrows decimating their ranks, whilst the enemy 
of the King of the Gods, that titan, veiled in his magic power, 
remained invisible. Then that illustrious Prince of the Titans 
let fly his whetted shafts that shone like the sun in all directions 
covering the foremost of the monkeys and destroying them j 
213 
YUDDHA KANDA 
and he caused spears, swords and axes resembling fire, shooting 
forth flames like a glowing brazier from which sparks fly, to fall 
on the ranks of the foremost of the Plavagas. Under the arrows 
and flaming darts, with which the vanquisher of Indra over whelmed them, the monkey leaders resembled Kimshuka Trees 
in full flower. 
As they looked upwards, some, struck in the eyes were 
blinded, and jostling one another, fell to the earth. With the aid 
of javelins, spears and whetted shafts charged with mantras, 
Indrajita, the Prince of the Titans, crushed all those warriors, 
Hanuman, Sugriva, Angada, Gandhamadana, Jambavan, 
Sushena, Vegadarshin, Mainda, Dvivida, Nila, Gavaksha, 
Gavaya, Kesarin, Hariloman, Vidyuddamshtra, Suryanana, 
Jyotimukha, Dadbimukha, Pavakaksha, Nala and Kumuda and, 
having disarmed those monkey leaders, he caused a shower of 
glittering darts, like unto the rays of the sun, to fall on Rama, and 
Lakshmana who accompanied him. 
Under the wave of arrows, which he heeded as little as though 
they were drops of rain, Rama, of prodigious splendour began 
to ponder within himself and said to his brother : — 
" O Lakshmana, having overwhelmed the simian army, that 
Indra among the Titans, the enemy of the Gods, trusting in his 
powerful weapon, now attacks us afresh with his sharp darts ! 
In virtue of the boon he has received from Swyambhu, that 
hero, full of energy and prowess, has made himself invisible 
despite his formidable size. How may Indrajita, who has taken 
up arms against us, be struck down in combat when his body is 
invisible ? 
" I recognize this to be the weapon and power of Swyambhu, 
the Beneficent and Incomprehensible One ! With a tranquil 
heart, O Sagacious Lakshmana, bear the fall of this shaft with 
me to-day ! Let this Indra of Titans, the leader of them all, 
cover us with a rain of darts ! The entire army of the Monkey 
King, his greatest warriors having been struck down, appears 
to have lost its splendour, yet when Ravani beholds us lying 
stretched insensible and impotent, manifesting neither joy nor 
anger, he will certainly rejoin Ravana, the enemy of the Gods, 
in his abode, having gained a great victory." 
Thereafter Indrajita, overwhelmed them both with a hail of 
p 213 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
missiles and, having reduced them to a state of impotence, that 
Indra among the Titans set up a shout of triumph. 
In this way, having overcome the simian army in battle, as 
also Rama and Lakshmana, he returned at once to the city ruled 
by Ravana's hand where, extolled by the Yatudhanas and filled 
with delight, he related all to his sire. 
chapter 74 
On Jambavan's Instructions, Hanuman goes to the Mountain of 
Medicinal Herbs 
Seeing the two Raghavas lying unconscious on the field, the 
army of monkeys and their leaders lost courage, nor did Sugriva, 
Nila, Angada or Jambavan dare to take any action. 
Thereupon Bibishana, foremost among the wise, seeing the 
general despondency, with his sagacious words re-assured those 
warriors belonging to the simian king, saying : — 
" Although those two princes are lying here without con sciousness, have no fear, you have no cause to despair ; it is in 
order to honour Swyambhu's pledge that they have allowed 
themselves to be struck down by Indrajha with his rain of 
missiles ! Indrajita received that excellent weapon that is not 
to be withstood from Brahma. It is in order to render homage 
to that God that the two princes have fallen in the fight ; it is 
therefore not the moment to lose heart ! " 
Having paid honour to Brahma's weapon, Marutj answered 
Bibishana, saying : — 
" Let us console those who still live among the army of the 
monkeys, which has been decimated by that celestial shaft." 
Thereupon, with torches in their hands, those two heroes, 
Hanuman and the foremost of the titans, began to range the 
battlefield together during the night, and they beheld the earth 
covered with tails, hands, breasts, feet, fingers, necks and severed 
limbs, scattered here and there, from which the blood Sowed, 
and monkeys as large as hills fallen on the field, their weapons 
still glowing. 
214 
YUDDHA KANDA 
Thereafter Bibishana and Hanuman beheld Sugriva, Angada, 
Nila, Sharabha, Gandhamadana, Jambavan, Sushena, 
Vegadarshin as also Mainda, Nala, Jyotimukha, Dvivida and 
all those monkeys lying on the battlefield. Seventy-six kotis 
of brave monkeys had been overthrown in the fifth and last 
period of the day by Brahma's cherished weapon. 
While looking on that formidable army, that had fallen under 
the blows of the enemy and that resembled the waters of the sea, 
Hanuman, accompanied by Bibishana, began to search for 
Jambavan and, beholding that aged one, bowed with the weight 
of years, riddled with a hundred arrows, the valiant son of 
Prajapati, like unto an extinguished brazier, the grandson of 
Poulastya1 rushed towards him and said : — 
" O Hero, is it possible that those penetrating shafts did not 
cut off thine existence ? " 
Hearing the voice of Bibishana, Jambavan, the foremost 
of the bears, who was scarcely able to speak, answered 
saying: — 
" O Indra among the Nairritas, thou who art full of valour, 
I recognize thy voice, O Pious One, say whether he, on account 
of whom Anjana and Matarishwan are happy parents, that hero, 
Hanuman, still lives ? " 
On this enquiry from Jambavan, Bibishana replied : — 
" Why dost thou remain silent concerning the two princes and 
question me on the subject of Maruti ? How is it that King 
Sugriva, Angada or even Raghava do not inspire thee with an 
affection as great as that which thou bearest for the son of Vayu, 
O Venerable One ? " 
Hearing Bibishana's words, Jambavan answered : — " Hear, 
O Tiger among the Nairritas, as to why I enquire concerning 
Maruti ; it is, that should the valiant Hanuman still live, even 
if the army has been destroyed, it is not destroyed ! If Maruti 
yet lives, O Dear Friend, he, the rival of Maruta, the equal of 
Vaishvanara in power, then there is still the possibility of 
survival ! " 
At that moment the son of Maruta approached that venerable 
one with reverence, paying obeisance to him and touching his 
1 Poulastya — Havana and his younger brother Bibishana were descended 
from the Sage Poulastya. 
215 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
feet and the voice of Hanuman moved his heart, so that the 
Prince of the Plavagas felt new life had been bestowed on him. 
Thereafter the illustrious Jambavan said to Hanuman : — 
" Come hither, O Mighty One, it is for thee to deliver the 
monkeys, none other has the power and thou art their best 
friend. This is the moment to demonstrate thy prowess, I 
see no other ; do thou bring joy to those brave troops of bears 
and monkeys ! Heal those two unfortunate beings, Rama and 
Lakshmana of their wounds. Prepare to cross far above the 
great path of the ocean in order to reach Himavat, the highest of 
mountains, O Hanuman, and there direct thy course to that 
golden Peak Rishabha, difficult to scale and of an extreme 
altitude. There the summit of Mount Kailasha will be seen 
by thee, O Slayer of Thy Foes ! Between the peaks of these 
two mountains, thou wilt behold the mountain of medicinal 
herbs rising in unparalleled splendour, where every kind of 
healing plant abounds. O Foremost of the Monkeys, thou wilt 
discover four plants growing on the summit, the radiance of 
which illumines the ten regions. They are — Mritasamjivani, 
Vishalyakarani, Suvarnakarani and Sandhani,1 herbs of rare 
value. Gather all four, O Hanuman, thou the son of the Bearer 
of Fragrance, and return to aid the monkeys by reviving them." 
At these words of Jambavan, Hanuman, born of Maruta, felt 
himself infused with tremendous power, as the ocean heaves 
with the force of the wind. Standing on the summit of the 
high mountain which he crushed with his weight, the valiant 
Hanuman looked like a second mountain. Trodden down by 
the monkey's feet, the mountain sank, unable to endure the load 
that pressed so heavily upon it, and the trees fell to the ground 
and caught fire on account of the rapid course of the monkey, 
whilst the peaks, trampled down by him, were shattered. Thus 
crushed, its trees, rocks and soil torn up, it became impossible 
for the monkeys to stand erect on that high mountain which was 
shaking, and Lanka, with its great gateways destroyed, its 
dwellings and bastions crumbling, full of terror-stricken titans, 
appeared to be reeling. Then the son of Maruta, like unto a 
* Mritasamjivani Reviver of the Dead. 
Vishalyakarani. Healer of wounds inflicted by darts. 
Suvarnakarani. That which heals the skin. 
Sandhani. That which produces a salve for wounds. 
ai6 
YUDDHA KANDA 
mountain, trod that support of the earth under foot, causing 
the earth and sea to quake ; pressing the mountain under his 
feet, he opened his mouth tike the fearful jaws of Vadava and 
began to roar with all his might in order to strike terror into the 
titans and, when they heard that formidable clamour, those 
lions among the titans in Lanka were paralysed with fear. 
Thereafter, paying obeisance to Samudra, Maruti, the scourge 
of his foes, possessed of redoubtable courage, for Raghava's sake 
prepared himself for the undertaking. 
Raising his tail which resembled a serpent, flattening his ears 
and opening his mouth wide, like unto the entry to Vadava, 
he sprang into the air with an impetuous bound, drawing trees 
with their branches, stones and a rabble of monkeys in his wake 
and, borne away by the force of the wind produced by the 
movement of his arms and thighs, deprived of resistance, they 
all fell into the ocean. 
Then the son of Vayu, stretching his two arms that resembled 
the coils of serpents, with a strength equal to the enemy of 
reptiles,1 set out in the direction of that celestial peak of the 
Lord of the Mountains, displacing all the cardinal points as it 
were. And he observed the ocean that rolled on and on with 
its garlands of waves and all the creatures moving in its depths 
while he coursed on like the discus loosed by the fingers of 
Vishnu. Mountains, flocks of birds, lakes, rivers, ponds, vast 
cities, crowded provinces, passed under his gaze as he journeyed 
on with the swiftness of his sire, the Wind-god. And the agile 
and courageous Hanuman, the rival of bis father in valour, 
strove to follow the orbit of the sun and, in extreme haste, the 
foremost of monkeys went on with the speed of the wind and all 
the quarters re-echoed to the sound. 
Then Maruti, that great monkey, full of energy, remembered 
Jambavan's words and suddenly Himavat appeared with its 
many streams, its great number of caves and waterfalls, the 
many kinds of trees that adorned it and its peaks like a mass of 
white clouds lovely to look upon. Thereafter he approached 
that King of Mountains and, as he drew near that Indra of high 
mountains with its golden peaks of great altitude, Hanuman 
beheld those illustrious and holy retreats of the ascetics, 
iGaruda. 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
frequented by the foremost of the Gods, Rishis and Siddhas, and 
he saw Brahmakosha,1 Rajataiaya, Shakralaya, Rudrashara pramoksha, Hayanana and the blazing Brahmashiras and he 
recognized the servants of Vivasvat. 
Thereafter he beheld the Vahnyalaya and the Vaishravanalaya, 
Suryaprabha and the Suryanibandhana, Brahmalaya and Shanka rakarmukha3 thus did he perceive the centre of the earth ; and 
Hanuman also discovered the steep Mountain Kailasha and the 
Rock of Himavat and Vrisha, that sublime and golden mountain, 
illumined by the radiations of all the curative herbs, the King 
of Mountains, where all the simples grow. Astonished on 
beholding that mountain wreathed in phosphorescent fires, the 
son of Vasava's messenger descended on that Lord of Hills 
covered with medicinal herbs, in order to gather them. 
Then the great monkey, born of Maruta, covered a thousand 
leagues, ranging that mountain where those specifics grew on 
that most elevated of peaks ; nevertheless, those sovereign 
remedies, knowing that Hanuman had come to gather them, 
made themselves invisible. Thereupon that hero, not being 
able to see them, grew angry and, in his ire, began to emit loud 
cries. Impatient, his glances inflamed, he questioned that 
mountain, the support of the earth, saying : — 
" What impels thee, thou who art of such strength, to show 
thyself (to be) without pity for Raghava ? O King of the 
Mountains, the hour having struck, overcome by the power of 
mine arms, thou shalt see thyself shattered to pieces ! " 
Thereupon, seizing hold of the crest with its trees, elephants, 
gold and many kinds of ore that adorned it, with its summit of 
1 Brahmakosha. The Place of Hiranyagarbha. 
Raj at ala ya. The Place of the Silver-navelled One. A mountain near 
Kailasha. 
Shakralaya. The Abode of Shakra. 
Rudrashakapramoksha. The place where Rudra discharged the arrow at 
Tripura. 
Hayanana. The Place of the Horse-necked One. (See Hayagriva). 
Brahmashiras. The Abode of the Deity presiding over the Brahma Weapon. 
Vivasvat. The God of Death. 
Vahnyalaya. The Abode of the Fire God. 
Vaishravanalaya. The Abode of Kuvera. 
Suryaprabha — Suryanibandhana. The Place where the suns meet. 
Brahmalaya. The Abode of the Four-faced Brahma. 
Shankarakarmtjkha. The Place of Shankara's bow. 
Rock of Himavat. The rock on which Rudra sat to practice asceticism. 
Vrisha. The name literally means — The Bull of Shiva. 
31 8 
YUDDHA KANDA 
jagged peaks and sublime and radiant plateaus, he broke it off 
roughly. 
Having thus uprooted it, he flew into the air to the great 
terror of the worlds, the Gods and their leaders and to the 
acclamations of innumerable inhabitants of the sky. Thereafter 
he flew away with the speed of Garuda, carrying that rocky peak 
which shone like the luminous orb and he too was filled with 
radiance as he followed the path of the sun. Coursing thus in 
the vicinity of that orb, he appeared to be its very image, and 
that peak spread a great light over the son of the God, who is the 
bearer of fragrance, so that it appeared as if Vishnu Himself, 
armed with his discus of a thousand fiery rays, were in the sky. 
Then the monkeys, observing him, shouted with delight and 
he also on beholding them, emitted tremendous roars. 
Hearing those cries of triumph, the inhabitants of Lanka set 
up a dreadful clamour and Hanuman alighted on a high rock in 
the midst of that host of monkeys. 
Thereafter he bowed to the chief monkeys and embraced 
Bibishana. 
Then the two sons of that King of Men, having inhaled those 
wonderful herbs, were instantly healed of their wounds and the 
others, those valiant monkeys, rose up in their turn and all the 
brave Flavagas were instantly cured of their wounds and 
sufferings, having inhaled those wonderful herbs and those who 
had been slain returned to life like sleepers waking when the 
night is over. 
From that moment the monkeys and titans fought in Lanka 
itself, and thereafter on Ravana's command and out of perversity, 
all the titans struck down in the fight by the valiant monkeys, 
both wounded and dead were thrown into the sea. 
Meantime the son of the Bearer of Fragrance, Hanuman, of 
formidable bounds, carried the peak of medicinal herbs back to 
Himavat and returned with speed to rejoin Rama. 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 75 
Lanka is set on fire by the Monkeys 
At that moment, Sugriva, the illustrious King of the Monkeys, 
addressed Hanuman in words fraught with wisdom, saying : — 
" Now that Kumbhakarna has been slain and the youthful 
princes have perished, Ravana can no longer harm us ! There fore let those valiant and agile Plavamgamas, who are able to do 
so, hurl themselves on Lanka with torches in their hands ! " 
Meanwhile the sun had withdrawn behind the Astachala 
Mountains and at the dread hour of night, the foremost of the 
monkeys approached Lanka with flaming torches and those 
simian ranks, furnished with fiery brands, rushed in on all sides 
so that the grim-visaged titan sentinels instantly fled away. 
Then the monkeys joyfully set fire to gates, pavilions, highways 
and byways and buildings of every kind, and the dwellings were 
consumed by thousands, and the public monuments, as high as 
mountains, toppled down and fell to earth ; all was consigned 
to the flames ! Sandal of great price, pearls, brilliant jewels, 
diamonds and coral, woollen cloths, rich silks, carpets of many 
kinds made of lambs wool, vases and weapons of gold, countless 
rare objects, harness and horse cloths, collars and girths for 
elephants, chariots with their furnishings and decorations, 
warrior's armour, trappings for their mounts, swords, bows and 
bow-strings, arrows, spears, goads and lances, cloths of wool 
and horsehair, tiger skins, innumerable perfumes, palaces 
enriched with pearls and precious gems, with stores of arms of 
every kind, all were burnt to ashes. And the fire consumed all 
the buildings with their ornamentation and devoured the 
dwellings of the titans who inhabited them. 
Clad in armour encrusted with gold, decorated with garlands 
and other ornaments, their eyes wild with inebriation, wine 
caused those inhabitants of Lanka to reel as they walked, whilst 
courtesans clung to their apparel, and they were incensed with 
fury against their foes. Armed with maces, picks and swords, 
220 
YUDDHA KANDA 
they were gorging themselves with meat and drink or sleeping 
on sumptuous beds with the objects of their desire. Full of 
terror they fled distracted, carrying their sons with them in all 
haste, whilst their luxurious and splendid mansions, which 
combined every comfort, were consumed by fire in hundreds 
and thousands on every side. Those golden buildings that 
seemed to touch the skies constructed like moons and crescents 
with their magnificent upper galleries, their trellised windows 
and terraces decorated with pearls and crystal, re-echoed to the 
cries of herons, peacocks and the tinkling of ornaments. 
Asleep in the many-storied residences, the lovely courtesans, 
awakened by the flames that scorched them, threw off the jewels 
that impeded their flight, crying : — 'Ah ! Alas ! ' in piercing tones. 
Meanwhile the palaces crumbled in the fire that consumed 
them, and those flaming mansions spread their light afar, like 
unto the summits of high mountains when struck by Indra's 
thunderbolts, so that it appeared as if the Peak of Himavat 
itself were ablaze. 
The houses on all sides, wreathed in fire, resembled blossoming 
Kimshuka Trees ; thus did Lanka appear that night ! Elephants 
and horses that had broken loose from their keepers gave the 
city an appearance of the ocean with its maddened sharks and 
crocodiles at the time of the end of the world ! Here a horse 
was seen running unchecked or an elephant standing motionless 
in terror. Lanka in flames illumined the sea, the waters of 
which, streaked with shadows, seemed to flow with blood. 
In an instant, the monkeys had set fire to the city and it looked 
as if the whole earth were aflame, as at the dread destruction of 
the world. 
Seeing the smoke, the women began to shriek and, when the 
flames reached them, their cries could be heard at a hundred 
leagues distance. The titans rushed out of the city, their limbs 
covered with burns, whereupon the monkeys, eager to come to 
blows, fell upon them. Monkeys and titans set up such a 
clamour that it caused the ten regions, the ocean and the whole 
earth to re-echo. 
Meantime, healed of their wounds, the two brothers, Rama 
and Lakshmana, intrepid warriors, took up their marvellous 
bows and, when Rama drew that excellent weapon, the dreadful 
321 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
thrumming thereof struck terror in the titans and, whilst he 
bent his great bow, Raghava shone in glory, as Bhava in his fury 
when he stretches the bow of the Vedas.1 
Under the shafts loosed by that warrior, one of the gates of 
the city, resembling the peak of Mount Kailasha, fell shattered 
on the earth, and beholding Rama's arrows falling on temples 
and mansions, those Xndras among the titans made a supreme 
effort and, while they closed their ranks, they emitted leonine 
roars so that it appeared as if the Night of Final Dissolution was 
at hand. 
Then the leaders of the monkeys received orders from the 
magnanimous Sugriva, who said : — 
" Enter the nearest gate and begin to fight, O Plavagas ! 
If any amongst you acts contrary to my orders, let him be 
slain!" 
Thereupon the monkey leaders bearing torches in their 
hands, took up their positions at the entrance of the city and, 
beholding them, Ravana, transported with fury yawned and 
the ten regions were thrown into confusion so that it seemed as 
if Rudra were manifesting his wrath. In his rage he sent out 
Kumbha and Nikumbha, both born of Kumbhakarna, with 
innumerable titans and, at his command, Yupaksha, Shonitaksha, 
Prajangha and Kampana set out with the two sons of 
Kumbhakarna. 
Then with the roar of a lion, Ravana said to those valiant 
warriors : — 
" Go forth immediately, O Titans ! " 
At his command, those brave titans, with their shining 
weapons, left Lanka emitting a continuous clamour and, with 
the splendour of their ornaments and persons they illumined 
the whole firmament as did the monkeys also with their torches. 
Then the light of the moon and stars and the brilliance of the 
two armies irradiated the heaven whilst the rays of the moon, 
their ornaments and the planets lit up the ranks of monkeys 
and titans on all sides and the light from the half-demolished 
mansions projected lurid flames over the flowing and tumultuous 
waves. 
1 A bow having the characteristics proper to bows as laid down in the Veda 
of Archery (Dhanur Veda,) 
YUDDHA KANDA 
With their flags and pennants, their swords and excellent 
axes, their formidable cavalry, chariots and elephants, their 
innumerable hosts of infantry, their spears, maces, sabres, 
javelins, darts and shining bows, that terrible army of titans of 
redoubtable valour and ardour seemed to be furnished with 
flaming missiles and, amidst the clash of hundreds of gongs, 
their arms, encased in golden sheaths, were brandishing axes, 
and the javelins of the titans rang as they struck with their 
arrows and their great bows, whilst the air was permeated with 
the fragrance of their garlands and the aroma of wine. 
Beholding that formidable army of titans that was not to be 
withstood, emitting the muttering of a great cloud, the 
Plavamgamas were agitated and, whilst their terrible opponents 
advanced towards them they let forth loud cries. 
Thereafter the enemy forces hurled themselves upon them 
like moths into a flame and, their maces whirling in their fevered 
hands, emitted lightning flashes which increased the exceeding 
splendour of that host of excellent titans. 
Meanwhile, as if a prey to intoxication, the monkeys rushed 
forward eager to right, striking those rangers of the night with 
blows from trees, rocks and fists, whilst they advanced on them 
loosing their sharp arrows. Then those titans of immense 
energy, cut off the heads of the monkeys who tore off their ears 
with their teeth and battered in their skulls with their fists, 
crushing their limbs with stones as they moved about. Other 
rangers of the night, of grim aspect, struck the foremost of the 
monkeys here and there with their sharp swords and the slayer 
was slain in his turn, cursing and biting as they massacred each 
other. Then one cried * Strike ! ' and was struck in his turn, 
whilst another called € It is for me to deal the blow ' and yet 
others called in chorus * Why trouble thyself? Stay ! ' 
Amidst the stained missiles, armour and shattered weapons, 
long spears were thrust forward and blows from fists, maces, 
sabres, javelins and ploughshares were given. Then the en counter between monkeys and titans assumed terrifying propor tions and, in the conflict, the rangers of the night slew their 
enemies in tens of sevens and, in their turn, the army of titans, 
their raiment in disorder, their armour and standards shattered, 
were assaulted and hemmed in on all sides by the monkeys. 
223 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 76 
The Prowess of Angada and Kumbha : Kumbha is slain 
At the height of that appalling struggle in which so many 
valiant soldiers perished, Angada advanced on the heroic 
Kumbha ; and the impetuous Kampana, in anger, challenged 
Angada and, forestalling him, struck him a violent blow causing 
him to red. Thereafter that warrior, coming to himself, 
hurled a rock on his adversary, who, crushed under the blow, 
fell to the ground. 
Seeing Kampana skin, Shonitaksha drove his chariot boldly 
at the monkey and, in his fury, struck him with his sharp and 
fiery arrows, tearing his flesh ; then, like unto the Fire of Death, 
he loosed innumerable flaming Kshuras, Kshurapras, Narachas, 
Vatsadantas, Shilimukhas, Karnis, Shalyas and Vipathas1 on 
him, and that valiant and energetic son of Bali, his limbs pierced, 
in his might, snapped the formidable bow of that titan and 
shattered his chariot with its shafts also. 
Thereupon Shonitaksha instantly took up his sword and 
shield and, without hesitation, sprang forward with an impetuous 
bound but the courageous Angada, receiving the violent impact, 
with a shout, broke that weapon with his hand. Thereafter 
that lion among monkeys, as if following the line of the sacred 
thread, let the blade fall on the titan's shoulder, cutting it in two 
and, raising his great sword, the son of Bali, shouting again and 
again, ran to the forefront of the battle to seek out further 
opponents. 
Now, in company with Prajangha, the courageous Yupaksha 
drove his car furiously against that valiant monkey and, at that 
instant, Shonitaksha, breathing heavily, rushed on that warrior 
of the golden bracelets.1 Full of energy, Prajangha, the 
intrepid companion of Yupaksha, hurled himself on the mighty 
Angada, mace in hand and, between Shonitaksha and Prajangha 
1 See Glossary of Weapons. 
1 Angada. 
YUDDHA KANDA 
the Prince of Monkeys resembled the full moon between two 
Vishakhas.1 Then Mainda and Dvivida went to Angada's aid 
and stood on guard near him, whilst the titans of immense 
stature, their battalions drawn up, full of vigour, threw them selves furiously on the monkeys with swords, arrrows and 
maces and the encounter between those Indras among the 
monkeys, in the grip of those bulls of titans, was desperate, 
causing the hair to stand on end. In that fight, the former, 
seizing trees and stones, discharged them, but Frajangha, who 
was exceedingly powerful, broke them with his sword. Stones 
and trees fell thick and fast on his chariot but were all severed 
by the countless shafts of the mighty Yupaksha, while the trees 
that, on their side, were thrown by Dvivida and Mainda, were 
crushed and destroyed by Shonitaksha, who was full of ardour 
and courage. 
Thereafter the infuriated Prajangha, brandishing his great 
sword with which he severed the limbs of his adversaries, leapt 
on Angada and, seeing him close beside him, that Indra among 
the monkeys, in his great strength struck him a violent blow 
with an Ashvakarna Tree and, with his fist, hit out at the arm 
holding the sword which fell at the impact. Beholding his 
sword lying on the earth, like unto an iron bar, that powerful 
titan raised his fist and, like unto lightning, brought it down with 
great force on the brow of the intrepid Angada, foremost among 
the monkeys, who reeled for an instant but, having regained 
his senses, that courageous son of Bali, boiling with rage, 
struck Prajangha's head from his shoulders. 
Then Yupaksha, seeing his paternal uncle lying on the field, 
quickly alighted from his chariot, his eyes full of tears and, as 
his quiver was empty, drew his sword. 
Beholding Yupaksha rushing towards him thus, Dvivida, 
with a mighty blow, struck him on the breast and, in his ire, 
seized hold of him with force. Perceiving his valiant brother 
made captive, the exceedingly energetic Shonitaksha struck 
Dvivida on the chest, and the blow caused the intrepid Dvivida 
to stumble, but he clung to the mace that his rival sought once 
more to raise against him. Meanwhile Mainda joined Dvivida, 
and Shonitaksha and Yupaksha, burning with courage, engaged 
1 AsterUms, (see Nakshatras.) 
325 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
the two Plavagas in a terrible struggle. The mighty Dvivida 
tore the face of Shonitaksha with his nails and, dragging him to 
the ground, crushed him, whilst Mainda, fired with wrath, 
pressed Yupaksha in his arms so that he fell lifeless on the earth. 
Then the army of those foremost among the titans, discouraged 
by the death of their leaders, turned and fled in order to rejoin 
the sons of Kumbhakarna ; and Kumbha, seeing those soldiers 
fleeing in all haste, rallied them and, perceiving those valiant 
warriors to have been cruelly used by the highly powerful 
monkeys, and their leaders being slain, Kumbha, full of ardour, 
began to execute difficult feats in the encounter. 
Taking up his bow, he, the foremost and most skilled of 
archers, let fly a series of arrows like unto venomous serpents 
able to pierce the limbs and, with his shafts and marvellous bow, 
shining with a great lustre he appeared like a second Indra 
illumined by the effulgence of Airavata ! Thereafter he stretched 
that bow up to his ear and struck Dvivida with a golden-hafted 
and plumed arrow and, as soon as it pierced that foremost of the 
Plavagas, who resembled the Trikuta Mountain, his legs stiffened 
and, trembling, he stumbled and fell. 
Mainda, however, beholding his brother succumb in that 
great combat, rushed towards his adversary with a huge rock 
and that hero hurled it at the titan, but Kumbha shattered it with 
five whetted shafts and, taking hold of another dart with a sharp 
point, resembling a poisonous snake, he struck the breast of 
Dvivida's elder brother with violence. 
Under the blow, Mainda, the General of the Monkeys, his 
chest torn open, fell unconscious on the earth. Thereupon the 
fiery Angada, seeing his maternal uncles overcome despite their 
prowess, hurled himself on Kumbha who was stretching his bow 
and, as he advanced, Kumbha pierced him with five whetted 
darts, then with a further three, and again with three spears, 
as if he were attacking an elephant. Thus Angada was struck 
by the mighty Kumbha with innumerable shafts but, though his 
limbs were pierced by a succession of penetrating darts, that 
were flaming and adorned with gold, yet he remained immoveable 
and let fall a shower of rocks and trees on the head of that 
warrior born of Kumbhakarna, who cut off and severed all the 
weapons that the son of Bali loosed upon him. 
326 
YUDDHA KANDA 
Seeing that leader of monkeys, Kumbha cut off his two 
eyelids with twin arrows, as one blinds an elephant with torches, 
so that the blood flowed and his eyes were veiled ; thereupon 
Angada, with one hand protected his bloody lids and with the 
other seized hold of a Sala Tree that stood near and, propping 
it on his chest, he stripped that leafy tree of its branches, and, 
having bent it a little, discharged it in the fight in the sight of all 
the titans, and that Sala Tree, that resembled the banner of Indra, 
appeared like unto Mount Mandara. Thereafter Kumbha cut 
that tree to pieces and pierced his adversary with seven pointed 
and murderous shafts so that Angada suddenly fell down, 
unconscious. 
Beholding the invincible Angada stretched on the ground, 
like unto the sea when its waters recede, the leaders of the 
monkeys carried the tidings to Raghava. Then Rama, hearing 
that the son of Bali had fallen and been overcome in the course 
of a desperate struggle, issued his orders to the simian leaders 
who were led by Jambavan. At Rama's command, those lions 
among the monkeys, full of rage, their eyes red with anger, 
rushed on Kumbha, who was stretching his bow, and flew to the 
aid of Angada. 
Then Jambavan, Susbena and Vegadarshin, enraged, threw 
themselves on that warrior born of Kumbhakarna, and seeing 
them advance, the titan cut short the impetuous onslaught of 
those foremost of monkeys with a hail of arrows, as a rock 
obstructs the course of a torrent and, in the path sown with 
arrows, the intrepid monkeys were unable to discern anything, 
nor, as the sea cannot overstep its shores, were they able to 
pass. 
Beholding the simian ranks overwhelmed by the rain of 
shafts, the King of the Monkeys, Sugriva, placing his nephew, 
Angada, behind him, fell upon the son of Kumbhakarna in the 
fight, as an impetuous lion on an elephant who is wandering on 
the slopes of a mountain, and that powerful monkey tore up 
huge trees, Ashvakarnas and others of varying fragrance, in 
great numbers, which he hurled at his adversary. Then the 
illustrious son of Kumbhakarna, with his sharp arrows, shattered 
that irresistible avalanche of trees that covered the whole sky 
and scattered those forest giants that shone like Shataghnis. 
227 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Beholding the rain of missiles dispersed by Kumbha, the 
valiant Monarch of the Monkeys, full of glory and majesty, 
remained unmoved and, suddenly struck by an arrow, he seized 
hold of Kumbha's bow that was equal to Indra's and broke it, 
throwing that weapon on the ground with violence. Then, 
having accomplished that incredible feat, he angrily addressed 
Kumbha, who resembled an elephant whose tusks are broken, 
and said : — 
" O Elder Brother of Nikumbha, thy strength and prowess in 
loosing thine arrows are admirable as are thy filial piety and 
courage and Havana's also. O Thou who art equal to Prahlada 
or Bah' or the Slayer of Vritra or Kuvera or Varuna, thou alone 
art like unto thy mighty Sire. Thou only, O Long-armed 
Warrior, armed with thy mace, the slayer of thy foes, cannot 
be overcome by the Gods any more than misfortune can over whelm him who is master of his senses ! Advance, O Most 
Intelligent Prince and witness me in action ! 
" On account of a boon, thy paternal uncle is able to with stand Devas and Danavas and, full of prowess, Kumbhakarna, 
in his turn, defied the Suras and Asuras ! With thy bow thou 
art equal to Indra and in valour Havana's peer ! In the world 
thou art now the foremost of the titans in strength and power ! 
Let all beings witness the mighty and prodigious duel between 
us to-day resembling the combat between Shakra and Shambara! 
By striking down those valiant monkeys, who were possessed 
of extreme courage, thou hast accomplished a feat without equal 
and manifested thy skill in the use of weapons. O Hero, it 
is from fear of incurring reproach that I have not slain thee, for 
thy great exploits have wearied thee; rest awhile therefore, 
reflecting on my prowess ! " 
Thus flattered by Sugriva with fair words, the ardour of that 
warrior was redoubled, as the sacred fire flames up when butter 
is poured therein. Then Kumbha seized Sugriva in his two 
arms, whereupon, like two elephants intoxicated with ichor, 
those two, breathing heavily again and again, their limbs 
interlaced, crushed each other, wrestling, and from their mouths 
emitting flames mingled with smoke. Under the trampling 
of their feet, the earth sank and the waters of Varuna's abode, 
overflowed on every side. 
228 
YUDDHA KANDA 
Finally Sugriva, having thrown Kumbha down with violence, 
cast him into the salty waves, thus causing him to become 
acquainted with the depths of the ocean. Nevertheless Kumbha 
rose again and leapt on Sugriva, with his fist delivering a furious 
blow like unto lightning upon his breast, and the armour of the 
monkey was shattered and blood gushed forth. That violent 
blow from the titan's fist struck against the bones of his adversary 
and, from the impact, a flame shot forth resembling the fire that 
bursts from the Mountain Meru when struck by lightning. 
Thereafter Sugriva, that mighty lion among the monkeys, 
effulgent like the solar disc of a thousand rays, parrying the 
thrust, lifted up a fist resembling a thunderbolt and brought 
it down with force on his opponent's breast. At the impact, 
which shattered him, Kumbha, bereft of his senses, sank like a 
brazier, the brightness of which is extinguished. Under this 
blow of the fist, the titan suddenly fell down, like unto the 
Lohitanga of brilliant rays expelled from heaven by the force of 
destiny. And Kumbha falling, his chest crushed by Sugriva, 
resembled the flaming body of a meteor shooting from the sky ! 
Thereupon Kumbha being struck down in the fight by that 
Monarch of the Plavamgamas of formidable valour, the earth 
with its mountains and forests trembled and a great fear seized 
the titans. 
CHAPTER 77 
The Fight between Nikumbha and Hanuman 
Nikumbha, seeing his brother slain by Sugriva, gazed on the 
King of the Monkeys as if he would consume him with the fury 
of his glance, and that warrior took hold of his brilliant and 
terrible mace as large as the peak of the Mahendra Mountain, 
like unto the Rod of Death, the support of the titans, which was 
festooned with garlands, plated with gold and embellished with 
diamonds and coral. 
Brandishing that weapon of a splendour equal to Indra's 
standard, the fortunate Nikumbha, who was endowed with 
redoubtable courage, opening his mouth wide, emitted bud 
ft 229 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
cries. With his breast adorned with golden pieces, his arms 
encircled with bracelets, his charming earrings and graceful 
garlands, his jewels and his mace, Nikumbha shone like a cloud 
shot with lightning and charged with thunder to which the bow 
of Indra is added. The tip of his weapon shattered the con junction of the seven winds and that loud-voiced hero glowed 
like a smokeless flame, whereupon the firmament with the City of 
Vitapavari, the most lovely palaces of the Gandharvas, the 
clusters of stars and planets, the moon and great luminaries 
seemed to be spinning round with the whirling of Nikumbha's 
mace ! Unapproachable in ardour, Nikumbha was like unto 
the Fire at the destruction of the worlds, his mace and his 
ornaments the flames, his wrath the fuel, and, in their terror, 
neither titans nor monkeys dared to move. 
Hanuman, however, baring his breast, stood fearlessly before 
him, and that titan, with arms as thick as iron bars which shone 
like the star of day, brought his weapon down on the breast of 
that mighty one so that it broke into a hundred pieces like a 
meteor suddenly exploding in space. But the great monkey 
remained unmoved under the impact of that weapon like a 
mountain in an earthquake. Thus assailed by his adversary, 
Hanuman, the foremost of the Plavagas, swinging his fist round 
with extreme force and lifting it up, with a swift bound struck 
Nikumbha a violent blow on the chest so that his armour was 
shattered and biood shot forth like lightning from a cloud. 
The shock caused Nikumbha to stumble but, steadying 
himself, he seized hold of the energetic Hanuman, whereupon 
a great cheering broke out amongst the inhabitants of Lanka, 
witnessing that combat. 
Though lifted up in this wise by the titan, the mighty 
Hanuman struck him a violent blow with his fist and, freeing 
himself from Nikumbha's grasp, leapt to the ground, thereafter, 
with a supreme effort, in his rage he struck him down, crushing 
him and then, leaping into the air, he fell heavily on bis chest 
and taking hold of his neck, pressed it with his two hands while 
he cried out, whereupon he tore off his head which was of an 
appalling size. 
Amidst the shrieks emitted by Nikumbha, who had fallen 
under the blows of the son of Pavana, the armies of the son of 
YUDDHA KANDA 
Dasaratha and the son of that Indra of the Titans, both filled 
with fury, entered into a desperate struggle. And Nikumbha 
being slain, the Plavagas emitted cries of joy that re-echoed in 
all the quarters of the horizon and the earth seemed to tremble 
and the heavens crumble, whilst the hosts of the titans were 
filled with terror. 
CHAPTER 78 
Maharaksha goes out to meet Rama and Lahhmana 
Seeing Nikumbha slain and Kumbha also laid low, Ravana, in 
extreme wrath, appeared like unto a raging fire, and that Nairrita, 
mad with anger and grief, spoke with urgency to the son of 
Rhara, the large-eyed Maharaksha, saying : — 
" Go, O My Son, and, at my command, strike down Raghava 
and Lakshmana with all the dwellers in the woods." 
On this behest, the son of Khara, Maharaksha, who was 
proud of his courage, answered : — 
" It is well ! I shall obey thee ! " Thereafter, having paid 
obeisance to Ravana by circumambulating him, that valiant 
warrior emerged from his sumptuous abode. Then Khara's 
son addressed the commander of the army, who stood near, 
saying :— 
" Let my chariot be brought hither immediately and assemble 
the troops at the earliest moment ! " 
On this, that night-ranger brought his chariot and assembled 
the army, whereupon Maharaksha, having paid obeisance to the 
car and circumambulated it, caused it to be driven forward 
urging on his charioteer with the words : * Drive on ! '. 
Thereafter Maharaksha issued this order to all the titans : — 
" Do ye precede me, O Soldiers ! As for myself, the magnani mous Ravana has commanded me to slay those two brothers, 
Rama and Lakshmana, in combat ! Today I shall lay them low 
with my whetted shafts, O Night Rangers, as also the deer of the 
trees and Sugriva. Today, under the blows of my mace, the 
great host of monkeys will be destroyed as dry wood by fire I M 
ajs 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Hearing Maharaksha's words, the rangers of the night, 
furnished with all sons of weapons, full of valour, closed their 
ranks. Able to change their shape at will, ferocious, endowed 
with sharp claws, their eyes inflamed, emitting the roar of 
elephants, causing the hair to stand on end, inspiring terror, 
those giants surrounded the huge son of Rhara, shouting 
joyfully, shattering the vault of heaven. Then conches and 
drums sounded by thousands in all the quarters whilst they, 
leaping and clapping their hands, caused a great tumult. 
Thereafter Maharaksha's charioteer suddenly let the goad 
drop from his hand, and the standard fell to the ground, whilst 
the horses, harnessed to his chariot, slackened their pace and 
stumbled as they advanced, mournfully shedding tears, and, as 
the illustrious Maharaksha set forth, a sinister and biting dust 
storm arose. 
Nevertheless the titans, having witnessed those portents, set 
out unheeding and full of courage to meet Rama and Lakshmana 
and their hue was like unto herds of elephants or buffalo and they 
bore the marks of the blows from maces and swords received in 
the forefront of battle. 
" Here stand 1 1 Here stand I ! " cried those seasoned warriors 
beginning to range to and fro on the battlefield. 
CHAPTER 79 
Maharaksha falls under Rama's Blows 
Seeing Maharaksha approach, the foremost among the monkeys 
rushed forward burning to fight. Thereupon a desperate 
struggle ensued between the rangers of the night and the 
Plavagas, like unto that combat formerly waged between Devas 
and Danavas, causing the hair to stand on end. 
Blows from trees and swords, clashes of maces and iron bars 
were exchanged, whilst monkeys and night-rangers assailed each 
other and the titans created carnage among the foremost of the 
monkeys with swords, maces, lances, javelins, harpoons, goads 
and arrows, nets, hammers, sticks and other weapons with which 
they struck out on every side. 
232 
YUDDHA KANDA 
Overwhelmed by a mass of missiles which the son of Khara 
hurled upon them, all the monkeys, distracted, fled full of terror 
and, seeing their enemies routed, the titans emitted leonine roars 
and triumphant shouts, while the monkeys scattered in all 
directions. Then Rama covered the titans with a hail of arrows 
and, beholding them overpowered in this wise, Maharaksha, 
that ranger of the night, consumed with the fire of his wrath, 
challenged Rama in these words, saying : — 
" Stay ! It is with me, O Rama, that thou shouldst measure 
thy strength ! With whetted shafts loosed from my bow, I am 
about to relieve thee of thy life ! Since, in the Forest of Dandaka, 
thou didst slay my sire, remembering thine iniquity, my wrath 
has increased ! O Wicked Raghava, a violent fire consumes my 
limbs since I failed to meet with thee in that great forest ! By 
good fortune thou art now before me ; as a hungry lion desires 
to see its prey, so did I seek this encounter ! Soon shall my swift 
arrows despatch thee to the region of the dead where thou shalt 
rejoin the warriors thou hast slain ! Of what use are further 
words ? O Rama, let all the worlds witness our combat ; let us 
fight with darts, maces, fists or whatever weapon thou 
prefcrest ! " 
Thus spoke Maharaksha and the son of Dasaratha, smiling, 
interrupted that flow of words, saying : — " O Titan, of what use 
is this prating ? It is in no wise worthy of thee ! On the 
battlefield one does not triumph by strength of words but by 
fighting ! Fourteen thousand titans and thy sire, Trishiras and 
Dushana himself, fell under my blows in the Dandaka Forest ! 
Today vultures, jackals and crows shall feed on thy flesh with 
their beaks, nails and claws, O Wretch ! " 
Hearing these words of Raghava's, Maharaksha loosed 
innumerable shafts on htm with great violence, but Rama, with 
a shower of darts, severed those golden-hafted and richly 
bejewelled arrows again and again so that they fell in pieces on 
the earth. Thereafter, as they joined issue, a desperate struggle 
ensued between the son of the demon, Khara, and the son of 
Dasaratha, and the clanging of their bow-strings and the clash of 
their gauntlets was like the muttering of thunderclouds. 
Then Devas, Danavas, Gandharvas, Kinneras and great 
Serpents stood in the sky eager to witness that prodigious 
*33 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
conflict. Each wound inflicted on the combatants redoubled 
their ardour as they exchanged blow for blow, and the countless 
shafts loosed by Rama were destroyed by the titan whilst those 
of the titan were severed by Rama again and again. 
Innumerable missiles covered all the regions and space itself 
and the earth was heaped on every side so that it could not be 
distinguished. Finally the long-armed Raghava, enraged, broke 
the bow of his adversary and with eight Narachas wounded his 
charioteer ; with his shafts he demolished the chariot and slew 
the horses who fell to the ground. 
Deprived of his car, Maharaksha, that prowler of the night, 
stood on the ground and, armed with his spear, he shone like 
Fire at the dissolution of the worlds ; and he was irresistible 
with his great lance, a gift from Shiva, that glittered in the air 
like unto the weapon of destruction.1 
Beholding that great spear that emitted flames, the Gods, 
struck with terror fled on all sides whilst that ranger of the night, 
lifting it up, hurled it with fury against the magnanimous 
Raghava. As it fell flaming from the hand of the son of Khara, 
Raghava, with four arrows, severed it in its flight and, broken at 
many points, that spear with its celestial gilding, having been 
destroyed by Rama's shafts, fell to earth like a great meteor. 
Beholding that weapon shattered by Rama of imperishable 
exploits, the Bhutas cried out in the sky : — ** Well done ! Well 
done ! "and observing his spear to be broken, Maharaksha, that, 
ranger of the night, raising his fist, called out to Kakutstha, 
"Stay! Stay!" 
Seeing him advancing, Rama, the joy of the House of Raghu, 
smiling disdainfully, took the Fire-weapon from his quiver 
whereupon, struck by Kakutstha's shaft, the titan, his heart 
transfixed, fell down and perished. 
Witnessing the fall of Maharaksha, all the titans, terrified of 
Rama's arrows, fled to Lanka. Thereafter the Gods rejoiced at 
the death of that night ranger, born of Khara, who had been 
stricken by the violent blows of Dasarathi and shattered like a 
mountain struck by lightning. 
' TJw weapon Shiva ia said to wield at the destruction of the universe. 
*34 
YUDDHA KANDA 
CHAPTER 80 
Indrajita sets out to fight once more 
Hearing of the death of Maharaksha, Ravana, hitherto victori ous in war, became a prey to violent anger, grinding his teeth 
and, enraged, he reflected on what ought to be done. Having 
considered the matter, in his wrath he sent his son, Indrajita, 
out to fight, saying : — 
" Having triumphed over those two powerful brothers, Rama 
and Lakshmana, return, O Hero ! Visible or invisible, thou art 
superior in every way. Wert thou not victorious in the struggle 
with Indra of incomparable exploits, therefore why shouldst 
thou not succeed with these two mortals ? " 
At this command of the King of the Titans, Indrajita, in 
obedience, proceeded to the place of sacrifice to offer oblations 
to Pavaka according to the traditional rites. During the ceremony 
female titans carrying red turbans also came there and took part 
in sacrificing to the fire. Thereafter titans came up hurriedly to 
that place where Ravani was, and, in that sacrifice, weapons such 
as Sharapatras, Bibhitakas, with fuel, red robes and iron ladles 
were placed there, then, having heaped the fire with Sharapatras 
and Tomaras, Indrajita seized hold of a living black buck by the 
neck. And that smokeless brazier devoured the sacred grass, 
oblations and fuel, whereupon many auspicious omens, indicative 
of victory, appeared. With its flames, bright as the moon, 
whirling in a southerly direction, the fire, having been kindled, 
seized hold of the offerings. 
Thereafter, having offered oblations to Agni and gratified the 
Devas, Danavas and Demons, Indrajita ascended his marvellous 
car which he had rendered invisible. In his magnificent vehicle 
harnessed to four horses, that hero, furnished with whetted 
shafts and armed with his great bow, appeared resplendent. 
The chariot with its decorations of refined gold, carved with 
figures of gazelles, moons and crescents shone with beauty ; and 
Indrajita possessed a standard that, with its golden rings and 
encrustations of emerald, glowed like a brazier. 
235 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Under the protection of the Rod of Brahma, like unto the sun, 
the mighty Ravani was invincible. Setting out from the city, 
having invoked Agni and acquired the power to make himself 
invisible by the aid of sacred formulas lawful to titans, the 
triumphant Indrajita spoke thus : — 
" Today I shall slay those two who have passed their exile in 
the forest in vain and, in combat, win a decisive victory for my 
Sire, Ravana. Today, having destroyed Rama and Lakshmana, 
I shall enjoy the supreme felicity of ridding the earth of monkeys!" 
Having spoken thus, he made himself invisible and thereafter 
rushed furiously into the fray, whither Ravana had despatched 
him. Effulgent, with bow and shafts, that ardent adversary 
of Indra, beholding those two valiant heroes like unto a serpent 
with three heads, who were loosing a stream of arrows in the 
midst of the monkeys, reflected : — ' These are those two ! ' and 
stretching his bow he covered those warriors with a shower of 
darts, as Parjanya lets loose his rain. Standing in his aerial car, 
invisible to the eye, he overwhelmed Rama and Lakshmana 
with whetted shafts. 
Enveloped by those swift darts, Rama and Lakshmana placed 
celestial arrows on their bows and those two valiant warriors 
covered the sky with a rain of missiles as bright as the sun, 
without striking Indrajita. 
Thereupon that powerful titan filled the sky with darkness 
and smoke, blotting out the cardinal points and shrouding 
himself in a dense fog; and, during his airy flight, neither the 
twanging of his bow-string nor the sound of the wheels nor the 
clattering of the horses' hoofs could be heard nor could he 
himself be seen. 
In the midst of that fearful darkness, that long-armed warrior 
loosed a shower of Narachas so that it appeared like an avalanche 
of rocks and, with his golden shafts, bestowed on him as a boon, 
the furious Ravani wounded Rama and Lakshmana grievously in 
every limb. 
Then those two lions among men, overcome by Narachas, 
like unto mountains under a deluge, loosed their whetted and 
golden-hafted arrows and those darts, adorned with heron's 
plumes, struck the son of Ravana in the sky and pierced him in 
his course, whereupon they fell on the earth covered with blood. 
236 
YUDDHA KANDA 
Thereafter, those two princes, with the aid of innumerable 
shafts, sought to sever the mass of missiles in their flight that burned 
them cruelly, and the two sons of Dasaratha aimed their 
excellent shafts in the direction whence those whetted darts fell. 
Ravani, however, a skilled driver, coursing on every side in his 
chariot, struck the two sons of Dasaratha with swift arrows and 
sharp shafts. Riddled by the golden-hafted arrows that rained 
upon them incessantly, the two sons of Dasaratha appeared like 
Kimshuka Trees in flower. 
None could follow the rapidity of the titan's course ; none 
catch a glimpse of him nor his chariot nor his arrows so that he 
resembled the sun obscured by heavy cloud. 
Struck down, wounded and slain by him, the monkeys lay 
stretched on the earth in hundreds, whereupon Lakshmana, 
enraged, addressed his brother, saying : — 
" Shall I loose the Brahma Weapon in order to exterminate 
all the titans ? " But Rama, who bore the marks of royalty, 
answered him :-— 
" Nay, it doth not behove thee to rid the earth of titans ! No 
one may strike him who has withdrawn from the fight, or who 
has sought protection or has bidden himself or stands before 
thee with joined palms or who is fleeing or intoxicated ! O 
Long-armed Hero, we will strive to slay Indrajita by employing 
those exceedingly fiery arrows resembling serpents. That 
magician, that insignificant titan with his invisible chariot will 
be overthrown by the monkey leaders should he reveal himself. 
Whether he penetrate heaven or hell or range the firmament, my 
shafts will consume him wheresoever he may take refuge and he 
will fall, deprived of life ! " 
Having spoken these significant words, that hero of the House 
of Raghu, who was surrounded by the Plavagas, in his great 
might, reflected on how he should destroy that barbarian, the 
perpetrator of evil deeds. 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 8 I 
Indrajita's Stratagem, Sita's Apparition 
Indrajita, having divined the mighty Raghava's intention, 
withdrew from the fight in order to re-enter the city. Thereafter, 
remembering the death of those brave titans, his eyes red with 
anger, the valiant Ravani set forth once more, leaving by the 
western gate surrounded by titans ; and the extremely energetic 
Indrajita, the descendant of Poulastya, that thorn in the side of 
the Gods, seeing those warriors, the two brothers, Rama and 
Lakshmana burning to fight, resorted to magic and caused the 
illusory figure of Ska to appear in the chariot encircled by a large 
force and he made seeming preparations to slay her. 
For the purpose of deceiving the monkeys, that wretch 
conceived this design and, advancing to meet them, resolved to 
slay Sita as it were. Then the monkeys, beholding him approach ing, enraged, rushed upon him with rocks in their hands, 
burning to fight. At their head marched Hanuman, that 
elephant among monkeys, armed with an enormous mountain 
peak. And he beheld in the chariot of Indrajita the unfortunate 
Sita, with a single tress, sorrowful, her features wasted on 
account of fasting ; and the beloved of Raghava wore only a 
soiled garment nor had she washed her countenance and the 
limbs of that lovely woman were covered with dust and mud. 
Seeing Maithili, Hanuman stood a moment as if stupefied, for, 
but a little while since, he had beheld the daughter of Janaka 
and, at the sight of that unfortunate being standing sorrowfully 
in the car, under the sway of that Indra of Titans, Hanuman 
thought to himself ' What does this titan intend to do ? * Having 
reflected thus, that great monkey, the foremost of the Plavagas, 
rushed forward to meet Ravani. 
Beholding that simian army, the son of Ravana, transported 
with rage, drew his sword from its sheath and brandished it over 
Sita's head in their presence, and he struck that woman in 
the chariot, who was created by illusion, whilst she cried out, 
238 
YUDDHA KANDA 
" O Rama, O Rama ! " Then Hanumau, bom of Maruta, 
seeing the titan seize her by her attire, became greatly afflicted 
and tears of grief fell from his eyes as he beheld the cherished 
consort of Rama, who was so divinely beautiful. Thereafter, in 
his anger, he addressed the son of the King of the Titans 
harshly, saying : — 
" O Wretch, it is to thy destruction that thou hast laid hands 
on her hair ! O Offspring of a family of Brahmarishis, thou hast 
fallen into the womb of a female demon. Cursed art thou for 
thine infamous conduct in cherishing such a desire ! Cruel and 
ruthless scoundrel, vile and puerile warrior, art thou not ashamed 
to perpetrate such an infamous deed ? O Pitiless One, without 
a heart, what has Maithili done, torn as she is from her home, her 
kingdom and the arms of Rama, that thou shouldst seek to slay 
her without mercy ? Sita being slain, thou shalt undoubtedly 
not survive long, since, deserving death for such a crime, thou 
hast fallen into my hands ! When thou hast yielded up thy life's 
breath, thy fate will be the lowest hell to which the slayers of 
women descend and which is eschewed by the most infamous of 
evil-doers ! " 
Speaking thus, Hanuman, attended by armed monkeys, 
hurled himself in fury on the son of that Indra of Titans who 
opposed the powerful army of monkeys that surged towards him 
with his titans of redoubtable ferocity. And he himself assailed 
that simian host with thousands of arrows and thereafter 
addressed Hanuman, that monkey leader, saying : — 
" I am about to slay Vaidehi before your eyes, who is the cause 
of Sugriva, thee and Rama, coming hither ! She being slain, I 
shall destroy Rama, Lakshmana, thou thyself, O Monkey, and 
Sugriva, as also the vile Bibishana. Thou hast said ' One must 
not slay a woman ', O Plavagama, but assuredly one is justified 
in doing that which will injure a foe ! " 
Speaking thus, with his sword furnished with a sharp blade, he 
struck Sita, that illusory phantom, who was sobbing and, having 
slain her, Indrajita said to Hanuman : — 
" Behold how the beloved of Rama has fallen under my 
sword ! Vaidehi is dead, thine arduous undertaking has been in 
vain!" 
Having thus slain her with his great sword, Indrajita, full of 
239 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
joy, standing in his chariot, began to shout aloud, and the mon keys, ranged before him at no great distance, heard him roaring 
full throatedly, stationed in his aerial citadel. 
Having slain the illusory Sita, the perfidious Ravani manifested 
great delight and, beholding him fully satisfied, the monkeys, a 
prey to despair, took to flight. 
CHAPTER 82 
Hanuman rallies his Forces : Indrajita's Sacrifice 
Hearing that formidable clamour and beholding Ravani, whose 
voice resembled Indra's thunder, the monkeys immediately fled 
in all directions. 
Then Hanuman, born of Maruta, called to those who, with a 
downcast mien, sorrowful and fearful, were fleeing on all sides 
and said : — 
" Why are you Seeing with a cheerless mien in all directions, 
O Plavamgamas ? Where is your courage ? Do not turn your 
back on the foe but follow me into battle ! " 
At this reprimand from the virtuous son of Vayu, the monkeys, 
re-assured, armed with rocks and trees, advanced and, in a 
transport of fury, challenged the titans. Thereafter those lions 
among the monkeys encircled Hanuman who accompanied them 
in the great fight and, as the Consumer of Offerings burns up 
the east with his rays, so did Hanuman, surrounded on all sides 
by the foremost of monkeys, consume the enemy host. Creating 
carnage among the titans, that most powerful monkey, attended 
by the simian battalions, resembled Yama on the day of the final 
dissolution and, smarting with grief and anger, Hanuman 
hurled a huge rock on Ravani's chariot. 
Seeing that missile descending, the driver, master of his 
horses, turned his car aside so that neither Indrajita nor the 
charioteer were struck by that rock which split the earth, burying 
itself after a fruitless flight. 
Then those inhabitants of the woods, shouting, rushed on the 
enemy in their hundreds and those giants brandished trees and 
240 
YUDDHA KANDA 
mountain peaks so that Indrajita was covered by a fearful hail of 
trees and stones by those Plavamgamas of redoutable valour. 
And they created havoc in the ranks of the enemy causing a great 
tumult and, under the ferocious blows of those terrible monkeys, 
the hideous rangers of the night fell, overwhelmed by trees on 
the battlefield. 
Beholding his forces thus roughly handled by the monkeys, 
Indrajita, enraged, surrounded by his divisions, advanced 
towards them loosing a quantity of arrows and that intrepid 
warrior struck down the foremost of the monkeys in great 
numbers. 
Furnished with spears, rocks, swords, harpoons, picks and 
maces, the monkeys, on their side, annihilated his companions 
in the struggle, and the exceedingly valiant Hanuman made use 
of huge trunks and branches of trees, stones and rocks to 
exterminate those titans of terrible exploits. 
Having thrown back the enemy forces, Hanuman said to his 
troops : — " We have acted in order to please Rama at the risk of 
our lives but she, for whom we have fought, the daughter of 
Janaka, is dead ! Having informed Rama and Sugriva of this on 
our return, we will do whatever they command ". 
Thus spoke that monkey general and heroically calling in his 
troops, he returned slowly with them. 
Meanwhile, seeing Hanuman going to rejoin Raghava, the 
wicked Indrajita, desiring to offer oblations, went to the sacrificial 
altar of Nikumbhila and, reaching that place, he invoked the 
God of Fire, Pavaka. Having entered the place of sacrifice at 
the instance of the titans, Indrajita began to pour on the libations, 
and the fire blazed up, consuming the oblations and blood, and 
Agni, effulgent, sparkling and satisfied, resembled the setting 
sun. 
Thereafter Indrajita poured libations on the earth for the 
prosperity of the titans, according to the rites in which he was 
well versed and, beholding this, the titans, instructed in what 
was fitting and unfitting, stood round in great numbers. 
241 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 83 
Lakskmana's Speech 
Meanwhile in that fight between the titans and the monkeys, 
Raghava, hearing the formidable tumult, said to Jambavan : — 
'* O Friend, to judge by the fearful uproar and the clamour of 
the combatants, Hanuman is performing an exceedingly difficult 
feat at this moment. Go, attended by thine army, O Leader of 
the Bears, and lend thine aid to that Prince of Monkeys who is 
engaged in combat ! " 
"Be it so ! " said the King of the Bears, and thereafter, 
surrounded by his troops, he advanced to the western gate to join 
Hanuman and that Lord of the Bears beheld Hanuman returning 
amidst his monkeys who had given up the fight and were 
lamenting. Beholding the host of bears, resembling a dark and 
fearful cloud, Hanuman caused diem to halt and retrace then steps. Then that illustrious warrior, in company with those 
troops, speedily returned to seek out Rama and, full of grief, 
addressed him saying : — 
" Whilst we were fighting, under our very eyes, Indrajita, 
born of Ravana, slew Sita who was weeping, O Destroyer of thy 
Foes and, my mind being afflicted by this spectacle, in despair I 
have come to inform thee of what has taken place ! ** 
Hearing these tidings, Raghava, overcome with sorrow, fell to 
the earth like a tree whose roots have been severed and, beholding 
the son of Raghu, who was like a God, lying on the ground, the 
monkey leaders from all sides rushed towards him as he lay 
consumed with the violence of his grief, resembling a fire that 
has suddenly been ignited ; and they sprinkled him with water 
that was fragrant with the scent of blue and white lotuses. 
Then Lakshmana, full of anguish, pressed him in his arms and 
addressed die half-conscious Rama, in words pregnant with 
reason and penetration, saying : — 
" O Thou who walkest in the path of virtue, O My Noble 
Brother, though thou hast mastered thy senses yet righteousness 
242 
YUDDHA KANDA 
has not been able to preserve thee from misfortune ! I see the 
form of that which is animate and inanimate but not the form of 
dharma, hence in mine opinion, it does not exist ! Inanimate 
objects may be seen and also those which are animate but the 
spiritual law is not manifest, else the virtuous such as thou 
would not suffer adversity ! If unrighteousness brought evil in 
its train, then Ravana would now be in hell and thou, who art 
virtuous, wouldst not be afflicted by ill-fortune. Meanwhile 
calamity spares the titan in order to strike thee down, which 
proves the consequences of righteousness and unrighteousness to 
be reversed ! If virtue produced good results and unrighteous ness evil ones, then those (like Ravana)., who have forsaken 
virtue, would suffer evil consequences. Those who never take 
pleasure in ill-doing should not be robbed of felicity since their 
every delight is in doing good ; those who follow righteousness 
should pluck the fruits thereof. Since prosperity attends on 
those in whom unrighteousness abides and those, who make 
virtue their way of life, are afflicted, these words (vice and virtue) 
have no meaning ! O Raghava, if the evil-doer perished through 
his own unrighteousness, unrighteousness itself would perish 
through its own evil and, it being destroyed, how could it 
destroy ? If it be through the decree of destiny that a man is 
slain or slays another, then it is destiny and not the slayer who is 
at fault. O Thou, Slayer of thy Foes, since one is unable to 
discern the law of dharma meting out retribution or behold its 
form and it is as if it were not, how is it possible to attain the 
highest by means of dharma ? If dharma truly existed, O King, 
O Most Virtuous of Men, then thou wouldst not have suffered 
this misfortune ; it is therefore manifest that this law is meaning less ! Dharma, being weak and powerless, attaches itself to the 
strong and, because of its weakness, rubs out any difference 
between itself and vice, therefore, in mine opinion, one should 
disregard it. If unrighteousness is merely the result of strength, 
then abandon it since might is right. But if, as some hold, 
dharma is loyalty to one's word, O Scourge of thy Foes, then thy 
sire is guilty of adharma in the duplicity and cruelty he meted 
out to thee without reason 1 If one accepts the existence of 
righteousness, then Indra, the Bearer of the Thunderbolt, God 
of a Hundred Sacrifices, was not justified in performing a 
M3 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
sacrifice after slaying the Ascetic Vishvarupa. If righteousness 
gives birth to unrighteousness, it must perish, O Raghava 1 
Men will act accordingly to their whim, O Kakutstha. In mine 
opinion, O beloved Raghava, dharma has indeed been destroyed ; 
thou hast severed its roots by abandoning thy kingdom ! like 
streams from the mountains, all success is brought to birth by 
material prosperity. The man of small intelligence, without 
resources, sees all his deeds come to nought as trickles of water 
drying up in the hot season. Renouncing wealth when one is 
accustomed to the advantages in which one is reared, is an error 
of judgment and is setting out on the wrong path. He who has 
wealth has friends and kinsfolk ; he who has wealth is verily a 
man of importance ; he who has wealth is a wise man. The 
wealthy man is brave, the wealthy man is wise, the wealthy man 
is powerful, above all the wealthy man is a man of worth ! O 
Hero, I have pointed out the disadvantages that result from 
giving up one's good fortune, I see no reason for thy determina tion to abandon the crown. 
" He who possesses a fortune finds virtue, pleasure and 
prosperity to be at his disposal ; the poor man who seeks wealth, 
cannot attain it and merely dreams of it. Wealth is the creator 
of joy, pleasure, pride, anger, and inner and outer control ; all 
these come from wealth, O Foremost of Men! Prosperity 
eludes virtuous men and those who pursue the path of duty in 
this world, nor can it be discerned any more than the stars in a 
stormy sky ! Whilst, in accordance with thy sire's command, 
thou didst live in exile, O Hero, a titan bore away thy consort who 
is dearer to thee than life itself. 
"O Hero, by my valour I shall be able to dissipate this 
great grief that Indrajira has caused thee to-day, O Raghava, 
arise therefore, rise up, O Lion among Men, O Long-armed 
Warrior, who art fixed in thy vows ! Dost thou not know that 
thou art the Self, the Highest 'Self? 
" Here am I, O Irreproachable Hero, at thy command I The 
tidings of the death of the daughter of Janaka enrages me 1 
With my shafts I shall overwhelm Lanka, its chariots, horses, 
titans and its king." 
YUDDHA KANDA 
CHAPTER 84 
Bibishana consoles Rama 
Whilst Lakshmana, in his fraternal affection, was consoling 
Rama, Bibishana, who had been restoring order in the ranks, 
came to that place. 
Four warriors, armed with various weapons, escorted him and 
they resembled heaps of black collyrium and were like unto the 
leaders of elephant herds. Then that hero approaching, beheld 
Raghava plunged in affliction, as also the monkeys themselves, 
whose eyes were full of tears, and he saw the great-souled 
Raghava, the joy of the Ikshvaku Race, stunned with burning 
grief, whereupon Bibishana, his heart pierced with anguish, 
enquired : — " How is mis ? " 
Then Lakshmana, seeing Bibishana, Sugriva and the monkeys, 
uttered these impetuous words : — 
" Indrajita has slain Sita ! Hearing these tidings from 
Hanuman's lips, Raghava has been overwhelmed with despair, 
O My Friend ! " 
As Saumitri was still speaking, Bibishana interrupted him and 
addressed Rama, whose mind was agitated, in words fraught with 
good sense, saying : — 
" O Indra among Men, that which thou hast heard spoken by 
Hanuman with a sorrowful mien, seems to me as probable as the 
drying up of the sea ! I am fully conversant with the wicked 
Ravana's design ; assuredly he would never permit Sita to be 
ill-treated, O Long-armed Warrior ! Though constantly pressed 
by me, who desired his welfare, to release Vaidehi, he would 
never listen to me. Neither by persuasion nor threats, concilia tion nor gifts nor by sowing dissension, has anyone been able to 
behold Sita, how much less by force of arms ? It was in order 
to deceive the monkeys that Indrajita set out to meet them again ; 
this seeming daughter of Janaka is the effect of illusion, O Long armed Warrior. 
" To-day Indrajita is going to the sacrificial ground of 
Nikumbhila to offer an oblation. Having performed the 
a 245 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
sacrifice, on leaving, the son of Ravana will be invincible in 
battle even ro the Gods led by Vasava. It is he, in the role of 
a skilled magician, who has made use of this illusion in order to 
undermine the courage of the monkeys. Let us leave now with 
our forces ere he accomplishes his object. Shake off the distress 
that has visited thee on this account, O Lion among Men ! The 
whole army is dispirited on beholding the grief that overwhelms 
thee. Come, pluck up courage, rise, call up thy valour and 
command Lakshmana to join with us and the troops which we 
command i 
" With his whetted shafts, that lion among men will compel 
Ravani to break off his sacrifice, after which he may be slain. 
Thy brother's sharp and penetrating arrows, that fly on wings and 
resemble birds of prey, will drink his blood. O Long-armed 
Warrior, let Lakshmana, who is endowed with auspicious marks, 
bear down on that titan in order to destroy him, as Indra looses 
his thunderbolt. O Best of Men, it is not fitting to defer the 
slaying of a foe j now suffer Lakshmana ro fall on thine adversary 
speedily in order to slay him, as Mahadeva looses his thunderbolt 
on the enemies of the Gods in order to exterminate them." 
CHAPTER 85 
Lakshmana goes to the Nikumbhila Grove to fight Indrajita 
Thus did the titan speak, but Raghava, who was overwhelmed 
with grief, did not fully comprehend what was said to him. 
Thereafter, having regained his strength, Rama, the Conqueror 
of Hostile Citadels, answered Bibishana, who was seated at bis 
side, saying : — 
" O Bibishana, Prince of the Nairritas, I desire to hear once 
more what thou hast said to me ; do thou repeat what I long to 
know." 
Hearing these words of Raghava, Bibishana, skilled in 
discourse, repeated that which he had already told him, saying: — 
" The behests thou didst lay upon me, O Long-armed 
Warrior, regarding the disposal of the forces, have been carried 
YUDDHA KANDA 
out scrupulously ; the divisions of the army are drawn up on all 
sides and the leaders have each had their posts allotted to them. 
O Mighty Lord, now hear what I have to impart further. 
" O Prince, beholding thee afflicted, we are discouraged ; 
abandon thy distress, that grief which conduces to the joy of the 
foe afar off ! Take courage, O Hero, and destroy the rangers of 
the night ! May felicity be thine, since thou art to be re-united 
with Sita ! O Joy of the House of Raghu, listen to my sage 
counsel ! Let Saurnitri set out bravely at the head of a consider able force and converge on the Nikumbhila Grove, in order to 
slay Ravani in combat by the aid of arrows, resembling venomous 
snakes, loosed from bis bow ! 
" That warrior,1 on account of his asceticism received a 
marvellous boon, the Brahmashira Weapon, from Swyambhu and 
also steeds that course at bis will ; he has undoubtedly reached 
the Nikumbhila Grove with his forces ! If he succeeds in 
carrying through the sacrifice, know that we are lost ! 
"'The foe who strikes thee ere thou hast reached the 
Nikumbhila Grove and ignited the fire, armed as thou art, will 
bring about thy death, O Enemy of Indra! ' Such were the words 
pronounced by the Lord of the World and thus was the end of 
that crafty titan ordained ! O Rama, send thy powerful brother 
to slay Indrajita and, he being slain, Ravana with his friends is 
also slain! " 
Bibishana having spoken thus, Rama answered him saying : — 
*' O Thou, whose prowess is truth, I know the magic power of 
that barbarian ; his knowledge of the Brahma Weapon endows 
that skilful and great magician with immense power so that he is 
able to deprive the Gods and Varum himself of consciousness in 
combat ! While he ranges the sky in his chariot, O Illustrious 
Prince, one is no more able to follow bis course than that of the 
sun in the midst of heavy cloud ! " 
Then Raghava, who was conversant with the magic power of 
that crafty foe, said to Lakshmana who shone with effulgence : — 
" Go with the entire army of the Lord of the Monkeys with 
its generals and Hanuman at their head, O Lakshmana ; take 
the army of the bears with their leader Jambavan, and destroy 
the titan possessed of the power of magic. This magnanimous 
1 Indrajita. 
*47 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
night-ranger1 will follow thee with his ministers in order that 
thou mayest fall upon that master of illusion." 
Hearing these words of Raghava, Lakshmana of redoubtable 
courage, who was accompanied by Bibishana, took up his rare 
bow, the foremost of all, and donning his mail, furnished with a 
sword and arrows, and full of joy, addressed him thus : — 
" To-day the arrows loosed from my bow, having pierced 
Ravani, will lay Lanka waste as herons ravage a lotus pool ! This 
very day the shafts speeding from my bow will pierce the body of 
that barbarian ! " 
Having spoken thus to his brother, the illustrious Lakshmana, 
eager to slay Ravani, departed with all speed and, having paid 
obeisance to the feet of his elder brother and circumambulated 
him, he set out for the Nikumbhila Grove, the place of sacrifice, 
where Ravani was to be found. Followed by Bibishana, Prince 
Lakshmana, burning with courage, with the good wishes of his 
brother, hastened away. Then Hanuman, at the head of count less monkeys and Bibishana wirh his counsellors speedily 
followed in his wake. 
Whilst the great hosts of monkeys threw themselves in his 
train, Lakshmana beheld the forces of the King of the Bears 
stationed in the way. Thereafter Sumitra's son, the joy of his 
friends, having already covered a great distance, observed the 
army of the King of the Titans ranged for battle and, bow in hand, 
that conqueror of his foes, the joy of the House of Raghu, coming 
upon that skilful magician, prepared to enter into combat with 
him in conformity with Brahma's ordinance, and that prince, 
who was full of ardour, was accompanied by Bibishana, the 
valiant Angada and also the son of Anila. 
Thereafter Lakshmana, as one entering into darkness, pene trated into the ranks of the countless enemy host that was 
exceedingly formidable, blazing with its glittering weapons and 
shaded by its dense rows of mighty chariots with their standards. 
248 
YUDDHA KANDA 
CHAPTER 86 
Indrajita breaks off Ms Sacrifice to fight ttnth Lakshmana 
As these events were taking place, the younger brother of 
Ravana1 gave the following counsel to Lakshmana, which was 
advantageous to his undertaking but detrimental to bis foes, 
saying : — 
"Armed with rocks, throw thyself with thy monkeys on the 
army of the titan which is now visible and resembles a dark 
cloud. Seek to overthrow them, O Lakshmana, for the son of 
that Indra of the Titans will become visible the instant die ranks 
are broken. With thine arrows, that equal Indra's thunderbolt, 
assail the enemy ; enter into the fray with all speed ere the 
sacrifice be completed. O Warrior, triumph over that perverse 
but skilled magician, the wicked Ravani of ruthless exploits, the 
terror of the worlds ! " 
At these words of Bibishana, Lakshmana, endowed with 
auspicious marks, let loose a rain of shafts on the son of the Lord 
of the Titans. Thereafter the bears and monkeys in a body, 
arming themselves with huge trees, rushed on the army of the 
titans which was drawn up in battle array and which, with sharp 
darts, swords, picks and spears hurled itself on the simian 
battalions eager to overcome them. 
Thereupon a desperate struggle ensued between monkeys and 
titans and the city re-echoed with the mighty tumult. Missiles 
of every kind, whetted darts, trees and mountain peaks sped 
through the air in dreadful wise so that the sky was obscured 
and innumerable titans, possessed of monstrous arms and faces, 
hurled their weapons on the foremost of the monkeys, creating 
extreme terror amongst them, whilst, from their side, the 
monkeys struck the titans with whole trees and crags, crushing 
them in the struggle. And the foremost of the bears and 
monkeys, of immense stature, created great terror among the 
titans with whom they fought. Learning that his army, over whelmed by their foes, was losing ground, the invincible 
Bibishana. 
*49 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Indrajita arose, the sacrificial rites as yet uncompleted and, leaving 
the Nikumbhila Grove, that was darkened by trees, Ravani, 
enraged, ascended his chariot that stood ready harnessed and 
fully equipped ; with his bow and arrows, he was formidable 
and resembled a heap of black collyrium, terrifying to behold 
with his reddened eyes, like unto Mrityu the Destroyer. 
Beholding him standing in his chariot and the titan host 
ranged round about him, rushing to attack Lakshmana with 
fury, Hanuman, the scourge of his foes, who resembled a 
mountain, uprooted a huge tree, difficult to wield and, like unto 
Kala's consuming fire, that monkey, with repeated blows, 
struck down the enemy on the battlefield where they lay insensible. 
Seeing the son of Pavana creating confusion in the ranks, 
thousands of titans attacked him with spears, those bearing 
lances with lances, those with swords with blows of their swords 
and those with harpoons with blows of harpoons. Iron bars, 
maces, sticks in their hundreds, Shataghnis,1 iron hammers, 
terrible axes, Bhindipalas, blows from their fists like unto 
lightning, slaps sounding like thunder, were all delivered at 
Hanuman, who like unto a mountain in stature, in his rage, 
created a terrible carnage. 
Then Indrajita beheld the foremost of the monkeys, the 
intrepid son of Pavana, like unto a rock, destroying his adver saries and, addressing his charioteer, be said : — 
" Drive towards that monkey ; he will certainly destroy all 
the titans if he is suffered to do so ! " 
At this command, the driver set his course at Maruti and 
drove the invincible Indrajita, who was standing in the chariot, 
upon him. Then that redoubtable titan, drawing near, let fall 
arrows, blows from his sword, harpoons, spears and axes on the 
head of that monkey, so that those formidable missiles that fell 
upon him threw Maruti into a transport of rage and he said : — 
" O Perverse Son of Ravana, if thou hast any claim to valour, 
then fight ; with thy two arms strive with me ! O Insensate 
One, if thou dost withstand my might, thou shall be accounted 
as the foremost of the titans ! " 
Then Bibishana pointed out the son of Ravana, to Lakshmana, 
as he, with bow upraised, sought to slay Hanuman, and said :— 
1 See Glossary of Weapons. 
250 
YUDDHA KANDA 
" The Conqueror of Vasava, the son of Ravana, standing in 
his car, is about to slay Hanuman ! O Saumitri, do thou slay 
Ravani with thy formidable arrows of incomparable workman ship, the destroyers of their foes, that put an end to their lives ! " 
Hearing Bibishana's words, that magnanimous one, a veritable 
Bibishana,1 looked on Indrajita of dreadful prowess, who, 
standing in his chariot, was invincible and resembled a mountain. 
CHAPTER 87 
Indrajita and Bibishana denounce each other 
Having spoken thus, Bibishana, delighted, taking Saumitri, who 
bore his bow in his hand, hastened away. Proceeding some 
distance, they entered a great wood where Bibishana pointed out 
Indrajita's place of sacrifice to Lakshmana and the illustrious 
brother of Havana showed Saumitri a huge Nyagrodha Tree of 
fearful aspect, resembling a dark cloud, and said : — 
" It is here that the powerful son of Ravana offers up his 
victims and thereafter enters into combat. Becoming invisible 
to all creatures, the titan overthrows his enemies in the fight, 
paralysing them with his excellent shafts. Do thou pierce the 
valiant son of Ravana, his chariot, steeds and charioteer with thy 
flaming darts ere he reaches the Nyagrodha Tree ! " 
" Be it so ! " replied the mighry Saumitri, the delight of his 
friends and, taking his stand, he drew his marvellous bow. 
Thereafter Indrajita, the powerful son of Ravana appeared 
before them in his chariot, that shone like fire, clad in armour 
with his sword and banner. Burning with ardour, Lakshmana 
challenged that invincible descendant of Poulasty a, saying : — 
" I challenge thee to combat ! Let it be in fair fight ! " 
Thus accosted, the brave and exceedingly energetic Indrajita, 
observing Bibishana, overwhelmed him with reproaches, 
saying: — 
" O Thou, born and bred in this race, the brother of my sire, 
why dost thou seek to harm his son, 0 My Paternal Uncle, O 
1 Bibishana — One who inspires terror. 
251 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Titan? For thee, O Wretch, there is neither tradition, brotherly 
feeling nor a sense of duty ! O Impious One, Thou art to be 
pitied ! O Perverse Being, thou art the object of reproach to the 
virtuous, thou who didst abandon thine own kind in order to 
seek service with the enemy. Is it not a want of intelligence in 
thee, that thou dost not discern the great difference between 
living with one's kindred and seeking a miserable refuge with 
strangers ? Ever if a stranger be endowed with every quality 
and a relation bereft of them all, yet the kinsman, though wanting 
in all merit, is to be preferred ; a stranger is always a stranger ! 
He who renounces his own kind to follow another will perish 
under the blows of the enemy after his own kinsfolk have been 
destroyed. Thou alone art capable of such ruthlessness and so 
relentless an attitude to thy kind, O Ranger of the Night, O 
Younger Brother of Ravana ! " 
Thus addressed by his brother's son, Bibishana answered : — 
"Art thou ignorant of my character that thou dost reproach 
me thus, O Titan ? O Perverse Prince, do not insult me but 
treat me with respect. Albeit I have been born in the race of 
titans, I possess those principles which appertain to men, my 
nature is not that of the demons ! Nay, I do not delight in 
cruelty nor does injustice find favour with me but, even if his 
character be dissimilar, how can a brother banish his own brother? 
The one, who rejects him who renounces his duty and is bent on 
evil-doing, is assured of good fortune, as one who shakes off a 
snake from his hand. One is told to fly that perverse wretch who 
habitually purloins his neighbour's goods and has intercourse 
with other's wives, as one would flee from a burning dwelling. 
" To take possession of another's property or to look with 
desire on his neighbour's wife or to distrust one's friends are the 
three faults that lead to destruction ! The ruthless slaughter of 
the great sages, the war on the Gods, arrogance, anger, hate and 
self-will are the defects of my brother, who is destroying himself 
and his empire, obscuring his good qualities as clouds veil the 
mountains. It is on account of his vices that I abandoned my 
brother, whose son thou art. Thou, thy father and Lanka are 
doomed ! O Titan, Thou art a mere boy possessed of an over- 
weening pride and art ill-mannered ! Say what thou wilt to me, 
thou art caught in the noose of death ! Thou shalt suffer the 
»5* 
YUDDHA KANDA 
penalty thou hast merited for the harsh reproaches thou hast 
made to me this day ! From henceforth thou shalt not be able 
to approach the Nyagrodha Tree, O Vilest of the Titans ! Having 
outraged Kakutstha, thou canst not survive! Enter into 
combat with this God among men ! Fall on the field of battle 
and go to the abode of Yama to the satisfaction of the Gods ! 
Display thy prowess, exhaust thy weapons and missiles but if 
thou approachest within the range of Lakshmana's shafts, thou 
and thine army shalt not return alive ! " 
chapter 88 
The Combat between Ldkshmana and Indrajita 
Hearing Bibishana's words, Indrajita, seething with anger, 
answered him with fresh invectives and advanced upon him in 
fury. Standing in his richly decorated chariot, that was yoked 
to black steeds, his weapons and sword upraised, bearing his 
mighty, pliant and terrible bow and his arrows that were fatal 
to the foe, he resembled the Destroyer, Death Himself. 
Then Lakshmana in all bis splendour appeared before that 
mighty archer standing in his car, decked with ornaments, the 
slayer of his foes, the valiant son of Ravana, and, transported 
with fury, Indrajita addressed Saumitri, who was seated on 
Hanuman's back and resembled the rising sun, and Bibishana 
also and the foremost of the monkeys, saying : — 
" Do ye all behold my prowess ! In an instant, a rain of 
arrows speeding from mine irresistible bow will tall upon you in 
the fight like unto a shower of rain from the sky ! Soon the 
shafts loosed from my great bow will scatter your limbs as the 
wind a heap of cotton ! Pierced by my sharp darts, spears, 
lances, daggers and other weapons, this day I shall send you all 
to the abode of Yama ! When, roaring like a thundercloud, I 
scatter the waves of mine arrows with a steady hand in the fray, 
who can stand before me ? 
" Formerly in a night engagement, with my darts that are 
equal to thunderbolts, I overthrew you both, leaving you 
353 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
unconscious with your escort ; hast thou forgotten it ? Since 
thou desirest to measure thy strength with mine, I who in my 
fury resemble a venomous reptile, I deem thou art anxious to 
enter the region of death ! " 
Hearing the taunts of Ravani, that Indra among the Titans, 
the son of Raghu replied indignantly : — 
" It is not easy to succeed in those undertakings of which thou 
dost boast and, in fact, he who accomplishes his end, alone is 
skilful ! O Thou whose situation is desperate, thou deemest to 
have attained thy purpose in this enterprise which is untenable 
from every aspect, merely by saying I have accomplished mine 
end ! O Insensate One, rendering thyself invisible on the field 
of battle is the procedure of a rogue ; honest men do not practice 
it ! Since I am within the range of thy shafts, O Titan, manifest 
thy prowess ; of what use is this bragging ? " 
Thus addressed, Indrajita who was ever victorious in combat, 
stretched his dread bow and with a powerful arm let fly his 
whetted shafts on his adversary. Discharged by him, those 
swift arrows resembling venomous snakes, struck Lakshmana 
hissing like serpents, and the impetuous son of Ravana, Indrajita, 
with those arrows of extreme velocity, overwhelmed Saumitri, 
who was endowed with auspicious marks, whereupon the 
fortunate Lakshmana, his limbs pierced by those darts, covered 
in blood, shone like a smokeless flame ! 
Meanwhile Indrajita, contemplating his feat, advanced, 
emitting an exceedingly loud cry and said :— - 
" O Saumitri, the feathered shafts loosed upon thee from my 
bow will rob thee of thy life, for their impact is mortal ! This 
very day, O Lakshmana, bands of jackals, eagles and vultures will 
descend upon thee when thou hast fallen unconscious under my 
blows ! Rama of perverse soul will see thee, his devoted brother, 
struck down by mine arm, thine armour shattered, thy bow in 
pieces, thy head severed, thou who art a warrior by birth only ! " 
To these insolent words of Ravana's son, the sagacious 
Lakshmana replied in measured and judicious terms, saying : — 
" Cease from boasting, O Wretched Titan of crooked ways, 
what purpose is served by vain speech ? Demonstrate thy valour 
in action ; thou dost vaunt thine exploits ere thou hast accom plished them ! To what end, O Titan ? Act in such a way that 
254 
YUDDHA KANDA 
I may believe in thine utterances ! Mark how, without addres sing a single word of contempt or provocation to thee and without 
bragging, I shall slay thee, O Last of Warriors ! " 
Thus speaking, Lakshmama, with five Narachas loosed with 
great force from his bow, which he stretched up to his ear, 
struck the titan full in the breast and those feathered shafts of 
swift flight, resembling fiery serpents, shone in the breast of the 
Nairrita like the rays of the sun. 
Struck by those darts, the son of Ravana, enraged, in his turn, 
pierced Lakshmana with three well-aimed arrows. Thereupon 
an appalling and fearful exchange of blows ensued between those 
lions among men and titans, who sought to triumph over each 
other. Valiant and endowed with strength, both courageous by 
nature, each found it hard to overcome the other, neither having 
his equal in energy and prowess. Resembling two planets 
coursing through the heavens, those two heroes strove, so that 
they seemed like those two invincible warriors, Bala and Vritra, 
struggling proudly like two lions, standing immoveable as they 
showered innumerable darts on each other, and that King of 
Men and Prince of the Titans fought on with extreme ardour. 
chapter 89 
Lakshmana and Indrajita continue to fight 
Meanwhile the son of Dasaratha, slayer of his foes, arming 
himself with arrows, loosed them in fury on that Indra of Titans 
and at that twanging of his bow-string, the titan leader, his 
countenance ashen, fixed his gaze on Lakshmana. 
Bibishana beholding the blenched features of the son of 
Ravana, said to Saumitri who was engaged in combat : — 
" O Long-armed Warrior, I behold inauspicious signs round 
Ravana's son, hasten therefore for he is assuredly nearing his 
end ! " 
Thereupon Saumitri, selecting some arrows resembling 
venomous snakes, let fly those barbed shafts like unto exceedingly 
poisonous serpents on Indrajita and he, struck by those missiles 
like unto thunderbolts hurled on him by Lakshmana, was dazed 
*55 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
awhile, his senses stupefied. Thereafter, beholding the valiant 
son of Dasaratha standing in the held, he hung himself upon him, 
his eyes red with anger and, drawing near, he began to taunt him 
afresh, saying : — 
" How is it that thou hast forgotten my prowess, when at the 
first encounter thou and thy brother were bound and laid low, 
thou who dost now seek to enter into combat with me anew ? 
In that great struggle under mine arrows resembling thunder bolts, both of you with your followers were first felled to the 
earth by me and then deprived of your senses. 
" Meseems it has escaped thy memory ! Since thou hast 
dared to challenge me, it is clear thou desirest to enter the abode 
of Yama ! If, at the first assault thou didst fail to recognize my 
superior strength, I shall soon demonstrate it to thee; stay 
therefore and face me with resolution ! " 
Speaking thus, he pierced Lakshmana with seven arrows and 
Hanuman with ten powerful whetted shafts ; thereafter with 
re-doubled fury, Indrajita pierced Bibishana with a hundred 
well-aimed darts. Seeing this, the younger brother of Rama, 
unmoved, began to laugh, saying : — 
" This is nothing ! " and that lion among men, Lakshmana, 
undaunted, taking up some dreadful darts, hurled them in anger 
on Ravani in the fight, saying : — 
" Nay, it is not thus armed that warriors enter the fray, O 
Night Ranger ! Thy darts are trifling and without power, 
conducing to mine ease ; it is undoubtedly not in this wise that 
brave men fight ! " 
With these words, he, from his bow, loosed a shower of 
arrows on his adversary. Shattered by Lakshmana's shafts, the 
heavy golden armour of the titan fell to pieces on the floor of the 
chariot, like a mass of stars falling from the sky. His coat of 
mail riven, riddled with wounds inflicted by Narachas, the 
valiant Indrajita resembled the rising sun and, full of ire, the 
courageous son of Ravana of redoubtable valour, struck Laksh mana with a thousand shafts, cleaving his celestial armour. 
Then, exchanging blow for blow, they rushed on each other and 
breathing heavily, engaged in a terrible struggle and, in the 
twinkling of an eye, their limbs were lacerated by arrows and 
from every part of their bodies the blood flowed. 
256 
YUDDHA KANDA 
For a long time these two valiant warriors tore each other 
with their sharp weapons and, in their unbridled energy, the 
two skilled combatants sought to overcome each other. Both 
riddled with a mass of arrows, their armour and standards 
shattered, they caused the hot blood to flow, as waterfalls let 
loose their torrents, and they let a dreadful hail of missiles fly 
with a great clamour, like unto the dark destructive clouds of 
doom, loosing their floods from the sky. 
For a long time they fought thus without turning back or 
experiencing any fatigue and those foremost of archers let fly 
their shafts again and again, and the multi-shaped darts crossed 
and re-crossed each other in the air. With agility, speed and 
grace, the struggle between man and titan continued with an 
appalling din and each, on his side, raised a tremendous clamour 
inspiring terror, like unto a fearful tempest and the sound of 
those two redoubtable warriors In desperate combat resembled 
two clouds clashing in the sky. With golden-footed Narachas, 
those two warriors, sought to overcome one another, inflicting 
wounds from which rivers of blood flowed and from their 
pierced bodies the golden-hafted arrows, covered with blood, fell 
to the earth in which they buried themselves. By thousands their 
whetted shafts converged in the sky, cleaving and riving each 
other, and both let fall a formidable mass of darts in the struggle, 
so that they appeared like heaps of Kusha Grass destined for 
two sacrificial fires. Thebodiesof those illustrious heroes, full of 
wounds, shon e like a Kimshuka or a Shalmali Tree, leaf-less and in 
full flower in the forest; and the impact was appalling, as Indrajita 
and Lakshmana fougbt, each desirous of overcoming the other. 
Lakshmana battled with Ravani and Ravani with Lakshmana, 
each striking the other without ceasing and the streams of arrows 
buried in their flesh gave those two powerful warriors the 
appearance of two hills covered with trees, and their limbs 
streaming with blood, riddled with arrows, shone like two fires. 
Thus did they fight for a long time without turning back in 
combat or giving way to exhaustion. Nevertheless, in order to 
allow the invincible Lakshmana, ever in the forefront of the 
fight, to overcome the fatigue of combat, the magnanimous 
Bibishana threw himself into the fray remaining near him to 
lend him his support. 
*57 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 90 
Indrajita loses Ms Charioteer, Chariot and Horses 
Seeing the desperate struggle between man and titan, who 
resembled two elephants with broken tusks desirous of over coming each other, Ravana's valiant brother, curious to behold 
the outcome of the duel, stood in the forefront of the battle, his 
excellent bow in his hand. 
Standing erect, he stretched his great bow, letting fly long 
and pointed arrows on the titans and these shafts of burning 
impact, falling thick and fast, tore the demons to pieces as a 
thunderbolt rives the high mountains. 
Then, in their turn, Bibishana's followers, the foremost of 
warriors, arming themselves with maces, swords and harpoons, 
struck the valiant titans in the fight and, surrounded by his 
companions, Bibishana resembled a full-grown elephant in the 
midst of young tuskers pressing dose to him. 
In order to encourage the monkeys, whose dearest wish was 
to slaughter their foes, Bibishana, the foremost of the titans, 
conversant with what was fitting to the occasion, uttered these 
pertinent words to them, saying : — 
" Indrajita is the sole support of the King of the Titans and 
this is all that is left of his army, why therefore, O Foremost of 
the Monkeys, have you relaxed your efforts ? This wicked 
wretch being slain in the fore-front of battle, all the titan warriors, 
save Ravana, have been slain ! The valiant Prahasta is dead and 
the all-powerful Nikumbha also, Kumbhakarna, Kumbha, 
Dhumraksha, Jambumali, Mahamali, Tikshnavega, Ashani prabha, Suptagna, Yajnakopa, Vajradamshtra, Samhradin, 
Vikata, Arighna, Tapana and Mainda, Praghasa as well as 
Prajangha and Jangha, Agniketu, Durdharsha, Rashmiketu who 
was full of energy, Vidyujjihva, Dvijihva and Akampana, 
Suparshva, Shakramali, Kampana, Devantaka and Narantaka 
who was full of valour. By slaying all these countless and 
exceedingly powerful titans, you have swum the ocean and now 
258 
YUDDHA KANDA 
it is for you but to cross the hoof mark of a cow. Attack the 
titans who still remain, O Monkeys ; all these warriors, whose 
strength has filled them with pride, have perished in the fight. 
It is not fitting for me to slay my father's son, but, laying aside all 
pity for Rama's sake, I will put an end to my brother's offspring ; 
yet though I desire to slay him, tears fill mine eyes and deter me ; 
the long-armed Lakshmana will best know how to subdue him ! 
O Monkeys, closing in upon him, place yourselves so that you 
may wipe out those who stand near to him." 
Thus incited by the exceedingly illustrious titan, the foremost 
of the monkeys demonstrated their delight by lashing their tails, 
and thereafter those tigers among the Flavamgamas, amidst 
repeated clapping of hands, emitted every kind of cry, like 
peacocks on beholding the clouds. 
Jambavan too was surrounded by his leaders and their forces 
and they assailed the titans with their nails and teeth and blows 
from stones. Thereafter that Lord of the Bears decimated the 
titans, who, banishing all fear, full of vigour, overwhelmed him 
with countless missiles such as darts, axes, sharp pikes, lances 
and spears, striking him, their exterminator, in the fray. 
Thereupon a formidable conflict ensued between monkeys 
and titans, like unto the fearful contest between the Gods and 
the Asuras fired with wrath, and Hanuman, enraged, broke off a 
mountain peak and having caused Lakshmana to dismount, 
slew the titans in their thousands. Meanwhile after a fearful 
combat with his maternal uncle, the valiant Indrajita, slayer of 
his foes, threw himself afresh on Lakshmana and a desperate 
duel arose between those two heroes amidst the general conflict. 
Then those valiant warriors let loose a rain of missiles with 
which they overwhelmed each other and, in the twinkling of an 
eye, they disappeared under a hail of arrows, as the glowing sun 
and the brightness of the moon under clouds at the end of 
summer. Their movements were so swift that one was unable to 
perceive when they took up their bows or stretched them or 
changed hands or loosed their shafts or selected or separated 
them or when they closed their fists or took aim and launched a 
succession of arrows with force, filling the sky on every side, nor 
was any object distinguishable. Lakshmana struck Ravani and 
Ravani, in his turn, struck Lakshmana and a general confusion 
259 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
arose between them during the combat. Barbed and pointed 
shafts, loosed by those two warriors, filled the space in the 
heavens as it were and those whetted darts, that fell in hundreds, 
spread over the cardinal points and the intermediate regions, so 
that everything was engulfed in darkness and extreme terror 
took possession of all beings. 
Then the orb of a thousand rays sank behind the Asta 
Mountains enveloped in shadow, and torrents of blood flowed 
that day and fearful beasts of prey emitted full-throated howls. 
" May good fortune befall the worlds ! " murmured the great 
Rishis, whilst the Gandharvas with the Charanas, panic-stricken, 
fled away. 
Meanwhile Saumitri with four arrows pierced the four black 
steeds caparisoned in gold of that Indra among the Titans, and, 
with the aid of a sharp, yellow, shining and terrible Bhalla, 
furnished with beautiful plumes, resembling Mahendra's 
thunderbolt, resounding like the clang of a gauntlet hurled with 
full force, that mighty son of Raghu severed the head of the 
charioteer from his shoulders while he circled round. 
Thereupon, his charioteer slain, Mandodari's valiant son 
seized the reins himself, taking up his bow ; and it was marvel lous to behold him driving his chariot as he fought. Yet while 
his hands were occupied with the steeds, his adversary struck 
him with pointed darts and while he attended to his bow, the 
horses were pierced with arrows. Then Indrajita, even though 
his horses were riddled with darts, caused them to circle bravely 
under the arrows loosed by Saumitri with exceeding lightness of 
hand. Seeing his charioteer slain in the fight however, the son 
of Ravana lost his zest for combat and grew anxious, and observ ing the titan's countenance change, the monkey leaders began to 
acclaim Lakshmana in the height of joy. Thereafter Pramathin, 
Rabhasa, Sharabha and Gandhamadana, eager to bring matters 
to a close, struck a mighty blow, and those foremost of monkeys, 
endowed with extreme vigour and remarkable valour, with a 
rapid bound, threw themselves on the four magnificent steeds 
of Indrajita. 
Under the weight of those monkeys who resembled mountains, 
the horses threw up torrents of blood and thereafter, crushed 
and mangled, fell lifeless on the earth. Having slain the 
360 
YUDDHA KANDA 
titan's steeds and shattered bis chariot, the monkeys, with a 
further bound, returned to Lakshmana's side. 
Springing from his car, the horses having perished, and his 
charioteer being slain, Ravani caused a shower of darts to fall on 
Saumitri, whereupon, like unto Mahendra, Lakshmana over whelmed Indrajita with shafts and he, righting on foot, his excellent 
steeds being dead, loosed countless whetted and marvellous darts 
on Saumitri in the fight. 
CHAPTER 91 
The Death of Indrajita 
The mighty Ranger of the Night, Indrajita, his horses slain) 
stood in the field in a paroxysm of fury, flaming with valour, and 
in their desire to triumph, those two archers, armed with bows, 
hurled themselves against one another like two mighty elephants 
in the forest. 
Rushing this way and that, titans and monkeys slew each 
other, not wishing to abandon their leaders. At that moment, 
the son of Ravana began to encourage the titans and praised and 
gladdened them by addressing them thus : — 
'* O Foremost of the Titans, a profound darkness reigns over 
all regions nor can we distinguish between ourselves and the 
enemy, therefore fight fearlessly in order to delude the monkeys 
and I too shall return to enter into combat in another chariot ! 
O Brave Companions, do not suffer the monkeys to triumph 
whilst I am in the city ! " 
At these words, the son of Ravana, slayer of his foes, eluding 
the vigilance of the dwellers in the woods, re-entered the City of 
Lanka, in order to provide himself with a fresh chariot ; and he 
caused a car embellished with magnificent gilding, furnished 
with javelins, swords and arrows, harnessed to the most excellent 
of steeds and driven by a skilful and intelligent charioteer to be 
made ready, whereafter the illustrious Ravani, victor in combat, 
ascended it. Surrounded by the foremost of battalions, the 
t 361 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
valiant son of Mandodari, Indrajita, urged on by the force of 
destiny, left the city and, drawn by swift steeds, with exceeding 
courage he rushed on Lakshmana and Bibishana who accom panied him. 
Beholding the crafty son of Ravana, mounted in a chariot, 
Saumitri, the intrepid monkeys and the Titan Bibishana were 
astonished j Indrajita, however, struck down the foremost of 
the monkeys with fury. Under the clouds of arrows falling in 
hundreds and thousands, Ravani, victorious in combat, stretch ing his bow to a circle, slew the monkeys in his wrath, displaying 
his extreme skill, and the monkeys, overwhelmed by the Narachas 
of dreadful impetus, took refuge with Saumitri, as all beings with 
Prajapati. Thereupon, inflamed with martial ardour, that 
descendant of Raghu severed the bow of Indrajita, thus demon strating his fieetness of hard but he, seizing hold of another, 
hastened to string it, yet Laksnmana shattered it also with three 
arrows and, having broken his weapons thus, Saumitri pierced 
Ravani's breast with five darts like unto venomous snakes. Then 
these shafts, leaving that great bow, having entered Iudrajita's 
body, fell to the earth like huge red serpents. 
His weapon severed, vomiting blood, Ravani took hold of 
another powerful bow with its stout cord and, aiming at Laksh mana, with extreme speed caused a shower of missiles to fall 
upon him, like unto Purandara letting loose his floods. Yet, 
irresistible as that hail of arrows, poured down by Indrajita was, 
Lakshmana, the Conqueror of his Foes, standing immoveable, 
repelled them. 
Thus did Ravani witness Lakshmana's marvellous prowess, he 
who was the intrepid and valiant son of Raghu. Thereafter 
Lakshmana, in fury, pierced each of those titans with three 
shafts in the fight, manifesting the velocity of his arrows, and 
Indrajita, on his side, riddled him with a hail of shafts. 
Then that India among the Titans, grievously wounded by his 
valiant adversary, the slayer of his foes, loosed a continuous 
shower of arrows on Lakshmana but, ere they reached him, they 
were severed by the sharp spear of that warrior, the destroyer of 
his enemies, and Lakshmana, with a crescent-shaped arrow, cut 
off the head of Indrajita's charioteer in his excellent car, while 
he was coursing here and there. 
YUDDHA KANDA 
Deprived of their driver, the horses, without deviating from 
their course, continued to draw the chariot, advancing and 
describing circles in a marvellous manner. Thereupon Saumitri, 
of fixed courage, unable to control his anger, let fly his shafts 
against the tiran's steeds causing them to take fright. 
Provoked by this action, the son of Ravana struck the terrible 
Saumitri with his ten arrows and those shafts, equal to lightning, 
that seemed composed of all the poisons, glanced off his golden 
armour. 
Seeing that his coat of mail was impenetrable, the son of 
Ravana, Indrajita, in a transport of rage, manifesting his lightness 
of hand, struck Lakshmana in the forehead with three arrows of 
graceful joints, and that illustrious warrior, the joy of the House 
of Raghu, with three shafts embedded in his forehead, shone in 
the forefront of battle like unto a triple mountain. Albeit thus 
smitten by the titan's arrows, Lakshmana, in his turn, instantly 
let fly five shafts which struck Indrajita, who was adorned with 
lovely earrings, full in the face. 
Thereafter Lakshmana and Indrajita, warriors of exceeding 
prowess, armed with powerful and mighty bows, overwhelmed 
each other with sharp arrows. With their limbs streaming with 
blood, those two heroes, Lakshmana and Indrajita, at that 
instant shone on the field of battle like two Kimshuka Trees in 
flower and each hurling himself on the other desirous of victory, 
pierced his opponent's limbs with formidable arrows. Filled 
with martial ardour, the son of Ravana smote Bibishana's 
handsome countenance with three darts and, having pierced that 
Indra of the Titans with three iron-tipped shafts, he struck all 
the monkey leaders one after the other. 
Highly provoked, the exceedingly energetic Bibishana felled 
the horses of the wicked Ravani with a mace, whereupon the 
mighty Indrajita, springing down from his car, his horses slain 
and his charioteer dead, hurled a javelin on his paternal uncle. 
Beholding this, the enhancer of Surnitra's delight, with his 
sharp arrow, severed it in ten pieces in its flight and it fell on the 
earth. Thereafter Bibishana, his mighty bow in his hand, let 
fly five Marganas, the impact of which being equal to lightning, 
and struck Indrajita, whose horses had been slain, in the breast. 
Having passed through his body, those golden-hafted arrows, 
*3 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
that flew straight to their target, were stained with blood so that 
they resembled huge red serpents. 
Then, highly incensed against his paternal uncle, Indrajita, 
standing in the midst of the titans, selected a marvellous arrow 
of great power that he had received from Yama and, seeing him 
place that formidable shaft on his bow, the valiant and intrepid 
Lakshmana took up one of immeasurable power which had been 
bestowed on him during sleep by the God Kuvera, and that 
weapon was irresistible, nor could the Gods nor the Asuras with 
their leaders stand before it. 
And those excellent bows, resembling maces, when stretched 
by their arms, emitted a piercing sound like unto two ospreys 
and the two powerful arrows notched on those wonderful bent 
bows lit up the faces of the two heroes with a vivid glow. Those 
barbed shafts loosed from the bows illumined the heavens, 
striking against each other with a violent impact and the shock of 
those formidable weapons as they struck against each other 
caused them to burst into flame, emitting sparks and smoke. 
Like unto two great planets colliding together, they fell shattered 
in a hundred pieces on the battlefield. 
Seeing those weapons severed and broken in the forefront of 
the battle, Lakshmana and Indrajita were seized with mortifica tion and fury and, in his anger, Sauraitri armed himself with 
Varuna's shaft whilst Mahendra's conqueror, fighting on foot, 
let fly Rudra's weapon in the fight which shattered Varuna's 
dart, despite its immense potency. Thereafter, in his ire, the 
illustrious Indrajita, victorious in combat, as if about to destroy 
the worlds, took up the filming Agneya Weapon but the valiant 
Lakshmana diverted it with the Solar Dart and, seeing his shaft 
thus baffled, Ravani, maddened with anger, seized hold of the 
Asura Weapon that was sharp and fatal to its foe. Then from 
his bow sped shining Kutamudgaras, spears, Bushundis, maces, 
swords and axes and, beholding that dire and dreadful weapon, 
irresistible to all beings, the destroyer of every missile, the 
illustrious Lakshmana arrested it with the aid of the Maheshwara 
Weapon. 
Thereupon a prodigious struggle arose between the rivals, 
causing the hair to stand on end and, from all sides, Beings, 
standing in the sky made a circle round Lakshmana and the 
264 
YUDDHA KANDA 
heavens were filled with a host of Beings overcome with astonish ment at the fearful tumult arising from that dread conflict 
between monkeys and titans. Rishis, Pitris, Gandharvas, 
Garudas and Uragas with Shatakratu at their head watched over 
Lakshmana during the fight and, in that instant, the younger 
brother of Raghava took up the foremost of shafts, the Avya 
Weapon of flaming impact, in order to transfix Ravana's son, and 
also the well-plumed and gilded dart, skilfully fashioned, to which 
the Celestial Host paid homage and with which Shakra, that 
mighty Lord of great energy, who is drawn by bay horses, 
formerly overcame the Danavas in the war between Gods and 
Asuras. That weapon of Indra's, undefeated in combat, fore most of shafts was placed by Saumitri on the most excellent of 
bows and the fortunate Lakshmana, in order to achieve his 
purpose, spoke to the presiding Deity of that weapon, thus ; — 
" If Rama, the son of Dasaratha, is truly virtuous and loyal and, 
in feats of heroism has no rival, then slay the son of Ravana ! " 
Thus speaking, that warrior, the slayer of his foes, stretched 
his bow up to his ear and let fly an arrow united to Indra's 
weapon on Ravani in the fight, that was incapable of missing its 
target, and it severed the lovely head of Indrajita, graced with 
earrings and its casque, causing it to roll on the earth. Separated 
from the body, Indrajita's huge head, streaming with blood, 
resembled a golden ball thrown on the ground ; and the son of 
Ravana fell dead on the battlefield with his armour, his helmet 
and his broken bow. 
Then all the monkeys with Bibishana, beholding the corpse, 
shouted in exultation, as the Gods rejoiced at the death of 
Vritra, and in the skies, the Bhutas, magnanimous Rishis, 
Gandharvas and Apsaras, on beholding the leaders of the great 
titan army scattering on all sides, harassed by the victorious 
monkeys, emitted shouts of triumph. 
Hard pressed by the monkeys, the titans, flinging down their 
arms, hastily fled in disorder towards Lanka and, in the general 
stampede the titans, throwing away their weapons, lances, 
swords and axes, ran in all directions at once. Terror-stricken, 
harried by the monkeys, some re-entered Lanka, others threw 
themselves into the sea or took refuge on the mountain. Now 
that Indrajita lay dead on the battlefield, the titans fled away in 
*5 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
their thousands. As the sun withdraws behind the Asta Moun tain and its rays disappear, so did the titans vanish from the 
horizon when Indrajita had fallen- As the solar orb with its rays 
extinguished or a fire without heat, so did that long-armed 
warrior lie bereft of life and the world, freed from her sufferings 
and delivered from her enemy, rejoiced ! And the blessed 
Shakra was exceedingly gratified at the death of that titan of evil 
deeds and the great Rishis also, whilst in the heavens, the Gods 
could be heard striking their gongs and the dancing Apsaras and 
the magnanimous Gandharvas caused a rain of flowers to fall 
that was marvellous to behold. 
On the death of that titan of cruel exploits, peace reigned, the 
waters became limpid, the air pure and Devas and Danavas 
rejoiced at the fall of one who was a source of terror to all the 
worlds. Thereafter a shout of triumph arose from the Devas, 
Gandharvas and Danavas who said : — 
" Now let the Brahmins go about their pursuits without 
anxiety, their sins removed ! " 
Then the monkey leaders, beholding that Bull among the 
Nairritas slain in battle, whose prowess was irresistible, paid 
homage to Lakshmana and Bibishana, Hanuman and Jambavan ; 
and all the Plavamgamas, growling and leaping with chattering of 
jaws, surrounded that descendant of Raghu, lashing their tails 
and clapping their hands. * Victory to Prince Lakshmana ! ' rose 
the cry and, embracing each other, the monkeys, their hearts 
filled with joy, hymned the praises of Lakshmana in every way. 
Witnessing that difficult feat of Lakshmana's, he who was the 
delight of his friends and seeing the corpse of Indra's adversary, 
the Gods, highly gratified, experienced supreme delight. 
CHAPTER 92 
Rama commends Lakshmana who is cured of his Wounds by the 
Monkey Suskena 
Lakshmana, graced with auspicious marks, his limbs bathed in 
blood, having slain that conqueror of his foes on the battlefield, 
experienced supreme satisfaction. 
266 
YUDDHA KANDA 
Taking with him Jambavan, Hanuman and all the inhabitants 
of the woods, the valiant and illustrious Lakshmana speedily 
returned to Sugriva and Raghava, leaning on Bibishana and 
Hanuman. Thereafter, having circumambulated Rama and 
paid obeisance to him, Saumitri stood beside his brother as 
Upendra by Indra. 
Then that hero, Bibishana, approaching with a look which 
itself was eloquent of delight, described Indrajita's fearful end 
and it was with joy that Rama learned how the head of Ravani 
had been severed by the great-souled Lakshmana and the 
tidings that Indrajita had fallen under Lakshmana's blows filled 
that valiant prince with unequalled felicity so that he cried 
out: — 
" Well done, O Lakshmana, this exceedingly difficult feat 
pleases me ! Ravani's death means victory, be assured thereof ! " 
Thereafter, smelling the head of Lakshmana, who had 
increased his glory yet who was abashed, the mighty Rama caused 
him to be seated on his lap and, with gentle strength, having 
clasped his brother, who was wounded, to his breast, he gazed 
upon him tenderly again and again. Then Rama, smelling his 
head once more, passed his hand rapidly over his body and, in 
order to sooth him, said : — 
" Thou hast accomplished an auspicious and highly momen tous feat, O Thou whose exploits are beyond the power of others ! 
Now that his son is slain, I deem Ravana to be defeated. To-day 
the death of that perverse wretch confers victory over Ravana, 
the Scourge of Men, upon me, be thou blessed, O Warrior ! 
Thou hast severed the right arm of the King of the Titans on 
which he leant for support 1 Bibishana and Hanuman too, bore 
themselves with valour in the great fight. In three days, that 
warrior was utterly vanquished ; from now I am delivered from 
my foes, for Ravana will assuredly come forth, setting out with 
considerable forces. When, on hearing of the death of his son, 
which will overwhelm him with grief, the King of the Titans 
advances surrounded by his vast army, I shall encircle him with 
my powerful forces and slay him, difficult though it be. The 
conqueror of Indra having fallen in combat with thee, under thy 
direction, O Lakshmana, neither Sita nor the earth itself would 
be hard to regain I " 
a«7 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Having lavished comfort and caresses on his brother, the son 
of Raghu, Rama, joyfully addressed Sushena, saying : — 
" Do thou pluck out the arrows from the highly intelligent 
Saumitri, who is ever devoted to his friends, and restore him. 
Speedily heal the wounds of Saumitri, who is attached to his 
friends, and do thou nurse back to health all those who received 
blows and wounds in the conflict, those bears and monkeys whose 
valiant battalions have trees as their weapons." 
At these words of Rama, the powerful monkey leader, Sushena, 
administered a sovereign remedy to Lakshmana's nostrils and 
having inhaled it, that hero was at once liberated from his darts 
and wounds. Restored to his normal state and freed from the 
arrows, his burning pains at an end, his fever suddenly allayed, 
Saumitri experienced supreme delight. Thereupon Rama, the 
King of the Plavagas, Bibishana and the valiant Chief of the 
Bears with their forces, seeing Saumitri standing free from pain, 
rejoiced exceedingly. 
Then that supremely difficult exploit of Lakshmana's was 
praised by Dasarathi of great soul, and, recollecting that the 
conqueror of Indra had fallen in the fight, the King of the 
Monkeys was filled with joy. 
chapter 93 
Havana's Grief on hearing of his Son's Death 
Poulastya's ambassadors, having learnt of Indrajita's death and 
confirmed it, conveyed the tidings to Dashagriva in all haste, 
saying : — 
" O Great King, Thine illustrious son has been slain by 
Lakshmana, who was accompanied by Bibishana ; we were 
witness thereof ! That hero, confronted by a hero, measured his 
strength with Lakshmana's ! Thy son, undefeated in any 
combat, he who triumphed over the Gods with Indra at their 
head, has gone to the Celestial Regions, having been overwhelmed 
by Lakshmana's shafts ! " 
Hearing of the terrible, cruel and grievous end of bis son on 
268 
YUDDHA KANDA 
the battlefield, that bull among the titans swooned away and only 
came to himself after a long time. 
Distracted with grief on account of his son's death, that 
unfortunate one, beside himself, burst into lamentation, crying:—- 
" O Thou, the Conqueror of Indra, how hast thou suffered 
thyself to be overcome by Lakshmana this day ? In thy wrath, 
wast thou not able to strike down Kala and Antaka themselves 
with thy shafts, as also the peak of the Mandara Mountain ? 
How much more was it possible for thee to strike down Laksh mana in the fight ? Hereafter the King of Death will be held in 
greater reverence by me, since to-day he has brought thee under 
the sway of destiny, O Long-armed Warrior ! Even among the 
Celestial Host, this is the path trodden by those skilful warriors 
who wage a brave fight ! He who is slain in the service of his 
lord goes to the heavenly regions. Seeing Indra jita slain this 
day, the Gods and all the Guardians of the World, free from 
anxiety will sleep in peace ! Now the Three Worlds and the 
entire earth with its woods appears deserted to me without the 
only Indrajita. To-day I shall hear the cries of the youthful 
daughters of the Nairritas in the private apartments, like unto 
the roar of elephants in a mountain cave. O Hero, where hast 
thou gone, relinquishing thy right to the throne, to Lanka, the 
titans, thy mother, myself and thy consorts ? Assuredly, I 
should have preceded thee to the abode of death so that I might 
have received those honours due to the departed, offered up by 
thee, but the contrary has taken place, O Hero ! Why do 
Sugriva, Lakshmana and Raghava still live and why hast thou 
deserted me ere thou hadst rid me of this triple thorn ? " 
Having first lamented thus, Ravana, the King of the Titans 
was overcome with a violent rage on account of the death of 
Indrajita and the grief at losing his son increased the fire of 
anger within him who was irascible by nature, as in the summer 
months the rays of the sun become more intense. From his half opened mouth, he seemed to breathe forth flame and smoke in 
his rage, as Vritra formerly from his, and his eyes, naturally red, 
were further inflamed with ire, glowing in dreadful wise. Under 
the sway of anger, his aspect, ever a source of terror, caused him 
to resemble the enraged Rudra ! Tears fell from the eyes of that 
infuriated monster like boiling oil from two flaming lamps. 
269 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Grinding his teeth, he made a sound like unto the revolving of 
the rod1 with which the Gods and Danavas churned the milky 
ocean. Mad with anger, like unto Antaka eager to devour all 
beings animate or inanimate, he allowed bis gaze to wander over 
the four quarters of the horizon nor did any titan dare approach 
him, and in a transport of rage the King of the Titans, seated 
amidst his warriors, in order to excite their ardour, said : — 
" Having practised penance for thousands of years and 
gratified Swyambhu on countless occasions, as the fruit of 
mine austerities, he accorded me complete immunity from 
Devas and Asuras. 
" Brahma bestowed a coat of mail, that gleamed like the sun, 
on me which, in my conflicts with the Gods and Asuras, none of 
my foes, though armed with thunderbolts, were able to shatter. 
To-day, clad in that armour and mounted on my chariot of war, 
who will dare to withstand me, be it Purandara himself? 
" The great bow with its arrows bestowed on me when I 
gratified Swyambhu, after an encounter with Devas and Asuras, 
that redoubtable bow will be drawn by me to the sound of 
countless musical instruments, in a mighty battle, to Rama and 
Lakshmana's destruction ! " 
Tormented by the death of his son, the ferocious Ravana, 
overpowered by anger, having reflected within himself, resolved 
to slay Sita. Rolling his reddened eyes, that cruel and terrible 
titan, in bis anguish, said in the presence of all the Rangers of 
the Night, in plaintive tones : — 
" My unfortunate son, in order to deceive the monkeys, 
having had recourse to magic, showed them an illusory corpse, 
saying : — ' This is Sita ! * Verily it shall become a reality ! I 
shall slay Vaidehi who is devoted to that evil wretch ! " 
Having spoken thus, he seized hold of a sword that was well tempered and bright as the stainless sky and rushed out in haste 
surrounded by his wives and counsellors. Ravana, whose heart 
was torn with grief on account of his son, taking up his sword, 
rushed out to find Maithili and seeing the king setting out in a 
great rage, the titans emitted leonine roars and embiacine each 
other, said : — 
1 This refers to the Mountain Mandara which was used by the Gods and 
Asuras as the churning rod. 
270 
YUDDHA KANDA 
" To-day we shall see those two brothers humbled ! In his 
anger, Ravana has overcome the four Guardians of the World and 
countless others have fallen under his blows ; the Three Worlds 
have yielded up their treasure to him whose prowess and valour 
have no equal on earth ! " 
As they were speaking thus, Ravana, in a transport of rage, was 
rushing to where Sita was to be found in the Ashoka Grove, and, 
though his friends sought to restrain him, he ran on, as in the 
sky the planet Rahu bears down on Rohini. 
The irreproachable Maithili, in the midst of the female 
titans who guarded her, beholding that furious titan with a great 
sword, was seized with terror, and the daughter of Janaka, Sita, 
seeing him continue to advance with that weapon upraised, 
though his friends sought to restrain him, in the height of 
misery, wailing, uttered these words : — 
" Beholding that wicked wretch rushing upon me in fury, I, 
who am defenceless but who yet have a defender, fear that he 
intends to slay me ! Despite my loyalty to my lord, he entreated 
me again and again, saying * Be my consort * and X constantly 
repulsed him. My refusal has assuredly caused him to give way 
to despair and, in a transport of fury, he is preparing to slay me. 
Or it may be that those two tigers among men, those brothers, 
Rama and Lakshmana, have, on my account, been cut down 
to-day on the battlefield. I hear a great clashing of gongs and 
the exultant shouts of innumerable people rejoicing ! Woe is 
me, the two princes have died for me or else this titan of cruel 
intent has come to slay me on account of grief over his son or he 
has been unable to slay Rama and Lakshmana ! Why did I not 
follow Hanuman's counsel, miserable creature that I am ! If I 
had departed, seated on his back, I should now be resting 
happily in the lap of my lord. Assuredly Kaushalya's heart will 
break when she learns that her son has perished in the fight and, 
weeping, she will recollect the birth, childhood, youth, virtuous 
deeds and beauty of that magnanimous hero. Overcome with 
despair, having offered up the obsequies in honour of her dead 
son, distracted with grief, she will ascend the funeral pyre or cast 
herself into the river. Cursed be that wicked hunch-back 
Manthara and her sinister counsels ; it is she who is the cause of 
the sufferings which will overwhelm Kaushalya." 
271 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Hearing the unfortunate Maithili lamenting thus, she, who 
resembled Rohini fallen under the sway of Rahu in the absence 
of the Moon, a virtuous and honest counsellor, the sagacious 
Suparshwa, seeking with his companions to restrain Ravana, the 
Ring of the Titans, said to him : — 
" Why, O Dashagriva, dost thou, the younger brother of 
Vaishravana himself, seek to put Vaidehi to death in an access of 
rage, disregarding the law ?x Thou who art a student of the 
Veda, who hast been purified by pious observances and who 
delightest in the scriptures, how art thou able to harbour the 
thought of slaying a woman ? O Valiant Monarch of the Titans, 
spare the beautiful Maithili and loose the vials of thy wrath on 
that man, entering into combat with him with our aid. This is 
the fourteenth day of the dark fortnight8 and to-morrow, on the 
day of the new moon, march to victory surrounded by thy 
forces. Courageous, armed with thy sword, in thine excellent 
chariot, a mighty car-warrior, thou shalt cut down the terrible 
Dasarathi and take possession of Mithila's daughter ! " 
Thereupon the wicked and powerful Ravana, giving ear to the 
judicious words of his devoted counsellor, returned to the 
palace and re-entered the assembly hall surrounded by his 
friends. 
chapter 94 
Rama's Exploits 
Having entered the council chamber, the unhappy king, the 
mighty Ravana, overwhelmed by the death of his son, seated on 
his throne, in the depth of affliction, breathing like an enraged 
lion, saluted the leaders of his army and addressed them saying: — 
" Do ye set out at the head of cavalry with a column of 
chariots, elephants and horses, with which you are abundantly 
supplied, and, in the fight, hurl yourselves upon Rama only, 
overwhelming him with a lain of missiles, like clouds in the rainy 
1 The Law of Dharma or Righteousness. 
1 Dark Fortnight — The fortnight of the waning moon. 
27a 
YUDDHA KANDA 
season. Thereafter when your sharp darts have pierced his 
limbs in that great battle, to-morrow, I myself will put an end to 
Rama's life in the presence of all beings." 
On this command from their king, the titans set out in their 
swift-moving chariots followed by innumerable battalions. 
Armed with maces, harpoons, swords, arrows and life-destroying 
axes, all those titans struck the monkeys, who countered them 
with blows from rocks and trees. Then, as the sun rose, a great 
and terrible struggle ensued between titans and monkeys, fearful 
to behold and they struck each other with countless shining 
weapons, javelins, swords and axes in the fray and a prodigious 
dust storm, arising on account of the battle, was laid again by the 
rivers of blood from titans and monkeys. With elephants and 
chariots as the banks, javelins as the fish, standards as the trees, 
corpses as the floating logs, rivers of blood flowed. 
Though soaked in gore, the valiant monkeys, leaping hither 
and thither in the fight, hacked the banners, armour, chariots, 
horses and weapons of every kind to pieces. With their sharp 
teeth and nails the Plavamgamas tore the hair, ears, foreheads 
and noses of their opponents. A hundred of the foremost of the 
monkeys leapt on every titan like birds on a felled tree and the 
titans, like unto hills, struck the redoubtable monkeys with 
heavy maces, javelins, scimitars and axes. Cut to pieces by their 
foes, the great army of monkeys sought shelter with Rama, the 
son of Dasaratha, the only true refuge. 
Then that exceedingly energetic hero, taking up his bow, 
penetrating into the ranks of the titans, overwhelmed them with 
a hail of darts, and when he entered their lines, like unto the sun 
entering the clouds, those formidable warriors, whom he was 
consuming with the fire of his shafts, were unable to discern 
him. And the titans, beholding the terrible exploits of that hero 
so disastrous to them, recognized their author to be Rama, and 
as the passing of a hurricane through a forest becomes patent, so, 
when innumerable battalions were overthrown and great cars 
overturned, they perceived it to be his work. And they beheld 
their army decimated by arrows, battered and crushed by his 
shafts but, so rapid were his movements, that they could not 
see Rama and they were no more able to discern Raghava than 
beings distinguish the soul that governs the senses. 
*73 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
"There is the one who is exterminating our cohorts of 
elephants ! " " There is he, who with his sharp arrows is 
destroying cavalry and infantry ! " 
Speaking thus, the titans, taking each other to be Rama in the 
fight, under this delusion, slew each other in anger, and they were 
not able to see the real Rama, who, nevertheless, was destroying 
their army, for they had all been thrown into bewilderment by 
the exceedingly mighty, marvellous and powerful Gandharva 
Weapon ! And sometimes on that vast battlefield, thousands of 
Ramas appeared to the titans and sometimes they could only see 
one ; and the bow of that hero seemed to them to be a myriad 
golden bows, whirling like a circling torch, while Raghava 
himself remained invisible ! 
With his body the pivot, his strength the lustre, his arrows the 
spokes, his bow the felly, the twanging of the cord and the 
gauntlet the sound, the force of his intelligence its radiance, its 
splendour the impetus of his weapon, its circumference the 
circle traced by Rama, while he was massacring the titans, he 
resembled the Wheel of Time in the eyes of all beings. And in 
the eighth part of a day, Rama with his naming arrows, single handed, exterminated the army of the titans who were able to 
change their form at will, which comprised eighteen thousand 
great elephants, fourteen thousand cavalry and two hundred 
thousand infantry. 
Exhausted, their horses slain, their chariots shattered, their 
standards broken, those rangers of the night, who had escaped 
the carnage, took refuge in the City of Lanka. 
With the corpses of elephants, infantry and horses, the battle field resembled the ground where the mighty Rudra, enraged, 
disports himself. 
Then Devas, Gandharvas, Siddhas and Paramarishis cried 
out: — 
" Well done ! Well done ! " lauding Rama's achievement. 
And the magnanimous Raghava said to Sugriva who stood 
near with Jambavan and the foremost of monkeys, Mainda and 
Dvivida : — 
" The power to wield this terrible weapon belongs to me and 
Tryambaka1 alone ! " 
1 Tryambaka — A name of Shiva meaning ' Three-eyed '. 
374 
YUDDHA KANDA 
Having destroyed the army of the King of the Titans, Rama, 
the equal of the magnanimous Shakra, who amidst darts and 
arrows transcended all fatigue, received the delighted homage of 
the Celestial Host. 
chapter 95 
The Lamentations of the Titan Women 
All those thousands of elephants and horses and those mounted 
upon them with the myriad chariots bright as tire and their 
flaming banners, as also the innumerable titans who were full of 
valour, able to change their form at will, armed with maces and 
axes and wonderful golden pennants, fell under the fiery darts, 
decorated with fine gold, of Rama of imperishable exploits. 
Beholding this and hearing those tidings, the rangers of the 
night, who had escaped the carnage, were filled with terror and 
those wretched titans were united in a common misfortune. 
The female titans and those who had lost their sons and 
kinsfolk, overwhelmed with affliction, assembled to wail and 
lament, crying : — 
" How did Shurpanakha, who was old, hideous and of sunken 
belly, dare to approach Rama in the forest, he who was the equal 
of Kandarpa himself? Seeing that handsome youth, full of 
nobility, ever engaged in the welfare of all beings, that monstrous 
Rakshasi, who should have been slain by others, was overpowered 
by lust. How could she, who was devoid of all good qualities, 
dare to make love to the all-powerful Rama who is possessed of 
comely features and endowed with every virtue? To the 
detriment of her own race, despite her grey hair and wrinkles, 
through a ridiculous infatuation condemned by all, that hideous 
creature pursued Raghava with her importunities to the 
destruction of the Titans, Dushana and Khara. 
" It was on her account that Ravana committed this offence, 
the fatal bearing away of Sita, the daughter of Janaka, and has 
provoked the emnity of the implacable and powerful Raghava. 
" When the Demon Viradha sought to possess Vaidehi, he fell 
before her under Rama's blows; this example should have 
*75 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
proved sufficient ! And fourteen thousand titans of terrible 
deeds were cut down in Janasthana by Rama's shafts resembling 
flaming torches, whilst, in the fight, Khara was also slain with 
Dushana and Trishiras by his darts that glittered like the sun ; 
this too should have been sufficient to prove his prowess 1 
" Kabandha too, with his arms four miles in length, who lived 
on blood, was slain despite his fury and screams ; this too was a 
manifestation of Rama's might. He slew the powerful son of 
that God of a Thousand Eyes, the mighty Bali who was as dark 
as a cloud, this too proved his valour ! And Sugriva, who dwelt 
disconsolate on Rishyamukha, the vehicle of his hopes shattered, 
was restored to the throne by Rama, which was a further proof 
of bis power. 
"All the titans counselled Ravana to his advantage, and 
Bibishana, in accord with his duty, offered him good advice in 
reasonable words but, in his folly, that monarch disregarded 
them. If the younger brother of Dhanada had given ear to 
Bibishana, Lanka, which has now become a cemetery, would 
not have been laid waste. 
" When he learnt that the mighty Kumbhakarna had been 
slain by Raghava and that the invincible Atikaya had fallen under 
Lakshmana's blows, as also Indrajita, his beloved son, still 
Ravana remained blind to the truth ! 
" ' My son, my brother, my lord has perished in the fight ' is 
the cry heard from the female titans in every family. Chariots, 
horses and elephants have been struck down in their thousands 
by the mighty Rama and are lying here and there with the foot 
soldiers whom he has also slain. He who is destroying us is 
Rudra or Vishnu or Mahendra or the God of a Hundred Sacri fices, in the form of Rama, unless he be the God of Death 
himself ! We live bereft of hope ; our warriors slain by Rama ; 
we see no end to our fears and we lament the loss of our defenders, 
" On account of the great boons he has received, Dashagriva 
seems unaware of the appalling peril that races him at the hands 
of Rama. Neither Devas, Gandharvas, Pisachas or Rakshasas 
will be able to rescue him when he falls into Rama's power. 
Each time Ravana has entered the lists against Rama, inauspici ous omens have appeared foretelling his destruction ! 
" When the Grandsire of the World was gratified with him., 
376 
YUDDHA KANDA 
he received immunity from Dcvas, Danavas and Rakshasas but 
he did not ask to be protected from man. Here without doubt is 
one of those who will prove fatal to the titans and Ravana. 
" Oppressed by that titan, who was filled with arrogance on 
account of the boon he had obtained through his severe penances, 
the Vibudhas took refuge with Brahma and, in order to be of 
service to them, the magnanimous Grandsire of the World 
uttered these memorable words : — 
" ' From to-day the Danavas and Rakshasas shall not cease to 
wander through the Three Worlds harried by constant fear ! * 
" Meantime the Gods with Indra at their head approached the 
Destroyer of Tripura, the God whose vehicle is the bull, who 
received them favourably and, being gratified, Mahadeva said 
to them : — 
" ' For your salvation, a woman will be born who will bring 
about the destruction of the titans 1 This woman, whom the 
Gods will employ, as formerly hunger was used to wipe out the 
Danavas, will be the destroyer of the titans and Ravana .' By 
bearing Sita away in his perversity and misconduct, Ravana has 
dug a fearful abyss in which all will be engulfed! Who is there 
in the world who can rescue us ? We have fallen into Raghava's 
hands, who is the equal of Time, the Destroyer of the Worlds ! 
"As elephants (that are) trapped in a blazing forest, there is no 
refuge for us in this extreme peril ! The magnanimous Bibi shana chose the fitting moment to take refuge with him from 
whom he foresaw the danger was to come." 
Thus did the consorts of those rangers of the night lament with 
piercing cries, in despair, plunged in grief and terror, their 
arms interlaced. 
CHAPTER 96 
Ravana goes out to fight and encounters ill Omens 
From every dwelling in Lanka the piercing cries emitted by the 
female titans and their heart-rending lamentations reached 
Ravana's ears and, sighing for a long time, that fierce-eyed 
monarch reflected awhile and thereafter fell into a great rage. 
t 277 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Biting his lips, his eyes red with anger so that the titans 
themselves were not able to endure bis aspect, he resembled the 
Fire of Dissolution itself. In a voice choking with fury, he 
issued the following orders to the titans who stood near, con suming them with his glance, as it were, and said : — 
" Do you summon Mahodara, Mahaparshwa and Virupaksha 
speedily and let troops go forth into battle at my command." 
At these words, in accord with the king's command, the titans, 
in fear, called the warriors together and those titans of formidable 
aspect unanimously cried : — " Let it be so ! " and having per formed many benedictory rites and paid obeisance to Ravana, 
those mighty car-warriors all bowed down with joined palms to 
their master, whose victory they desired, and set out towards 
the battlefield. 
Then Ravana, agitated with fury, with a sneering laugh, said : — 
" To-day with my shafts, loosed from the bow resembling the 
sun at the end of the world-cycle, I shall send Raghava and 
Lakshmana to the abode of Yama ! By the death of our foes, I 
shall avenge Khara, Kumbhakarna, Frahasta and Indrajita this 
day! 
" Neither space nor the cardinal points nor heaven nor the seas 
themselves will be visible under the cloud of shafts with which I 
shall cover them. To-day with my bow I shall cut the foremost 
of the monkey battalions to pieces with a succession of my 
plumed darts. To-day from the height of my chariot, swift as 
the wind, I shall submerge the simian army under the rolling 
waves of mine arrows with the aid of my bow in the guise of the 
ocean. This day I shall be the elephant who tramples under his 
feet those divisions resembling lakes, with open lotuses the 
faces, the glistening stamens the bodies ! This day, with each 
arrow loosed in the battle, I shall pierce the monkey forces in 
their hundreds, as they fight furiously with trees. By slaying 
mine adversary to-day, I shall dry the tears of all those who have 
lost their brothers or whose sons have perished. To-day, 
pierced by my shafts, so large a number of monkeys will lie 
scattered here and there that, through my prowess one will not 
be able to discern the earth's surface ! To-day the crows, 
vultures and beasts of prey will be sated by the flesh of the foe 
struck down by my darts. 
278 
YUDDHA KANDA 
" Let my chariot be yoked with all speed and let my bow be 
brought immediately ; let those rangers of the night, who are 
still here, follow me into battle ! " 
At this command, Mahaparshwa gave his orders to the army 
leaders, who were present, saying : — 
" Hasten to assemble the troops ! " On this, the leaders 
summoned the titans, going from house to house, making the 
entire circuit of Lanka at a rapid pace. Instandy all the titans of 
grim aspect ran out with a formidable clamour, carrying every 
kind of weapon in their hands. Swords, lances, clubs, maces, 
hammers, Halas, spears with sharp points, huge Kutamudgaras, 
harpoons of every kind, discus, pointed Parashvas, Bhindipalas, 
Shataghnis and various other arms. Thereafter four officers 
under his command, brought a hundred thousand chariots to 
Ravana and three hundred thousand elephants, sixty kotis of 
horses, mules and buffalo and innumerable foot soldiers, all 
hastening there at the king's command. 
Whilst the leaders rallied the forces who were to be found in 
the city, the sovereign's driver prepared his chariot ; and it was 
superbly furnished with celestial weapons and embellished with 
every kind of ornament, filled with various arms, adorned with 
rows of bells, encrusted with pearls, blazing with its jewelled 
pillars and covered with thousands of golden pinnacles. 
Beholding it, all the titans were seized with exceeding admira tion and, perceiving it, Ravana, the Lord of the Titans ascended 
thereon and mounted that car glittering like a myriad suns, 
blazing like fire itself, and effulgent with its own lustre. Then 
Ravana drove away immediately surrounded by innumerable 
titans, bearing down the earth as it were with the weight of his 
forces ; and, amongst the titans on all sides, there was a great 
din of shouting and shrilling of pipes accompanied by tabors, 
war drums and conches. 
" There goes the King of the Titans with his fan and canopy, 
the abductor of Sita, the ruthless slayer of brahmins, that thorn 
in the side of the Gods, who is setting forth to fight the Prince 
of the House of Raghu ! " Such were the cries heard on all 
sides and, at the uproar, the earth trembled whilst the monkeys 
fled in terror. 
Meanwhile, the long-armed Ravana, surrounded by his 
279 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
ministers, marched on, full of the ardour of combat and certain 
of victory. At his command Mahaparshwa, Mahodara and the 
indomitable Virupaksha ascended their chariots and these 
warriors, in their delight, emitted war cries loud enough to 
shatter the earth and, with formidable shouts, they set out eager 
for victory. 
The highly effulgent monarch, surrounded by his valiant 
battalions, rushed into battle, brandishing his bow, like Yama at 
the dissolution of the world, and that great warrior, mounted on 
his car harnessed to swift steeds set out through the gate where 
Rama and Lakshmana were encamped. At that moment the 
sun lost its brilliance, the quarters were enveloped in darkness, 
the birds emitted dreadful cries, the earth trembled, the Gods 
let fall a rain of blood and Ravana's horses stumbled, whilst a 
vulture alighted on the pole of his banner and sinister jackals 
howled. Then that titan felt his left eye twitch and tremors pass 
through his left arm ; he grew pale and his voice seemed to 
die away. As Dashagriva set forth to fight, ill omens appeared 
presaging his death ; a meteor fell from the sky with the crash 
of thunder and herons and vultures emitted mournful cries. 
Ravana, however, remained unmoved by the terrible portents 
that appeared and rushed madly to his doom, urged on by 
destiny. 
At the sound of the titan chariots, the rakshasa host and the 
monkey army also prepared to give battle and from every side, 
impatient for victory, challenged one another. 
Meanwhile, in his ire, Dashagriva with his golden shafts, 
created havoc among the monkeys and some among those 
heroic warriors had their heads severed by him and the hearts of 
others were pierced or their ears cut off and some fell lifeless, 
the flanks of others being torn, their heads broken or their eyes 
put out. Whenever the ten-headed titan, rolling his eyes 
furiously, turned his chariot in the fight, the ferocity of his 
assault was irresistible to the leaders of his foes. 
YUDDHA KANDA 
CHAPTER 97 
The Fight between Virupaksha and Sugriva. Virupaksha's Death 
The mutilated corpses of the monkeys, who had fallen under the 
shafts of Dashagriva were heaped on the earth, and the Plavam gamas were as unable to endure that irresistible avalanche of 
darts loosed by Ravana, as butterflies a scorching fire. Tormented 
by those sharp arrows, they fled screaming like elephants 
enveloped in flames and Ravana advanced in the fight scattering 
them with his darts as the wind disperses the clouds. 
Having, in his fury, exterminated those inhabitants of the 
woods, that Indra among the Titans rushed on to find Raghava. 
Then Sugriva, seeing the monkeys cut to pieces and routed, gave 
over his position to Sushena and addressed himself for battle. 
Relinquishing his command to that monkey, who was his equal in 
valour, Sugriva went out to meet the enemy, a tree in his hand. 
At his side and following in his footsteps marched all the monkey 
leaders brandishing enormous rocks and every kind of tree. 
Thereafter that royal giant let forth a great shout and fell on 
that mob of titans, destroying their leaders, and that mighty 
monarch crushed the titan divisions, as at the end of the world 
cycle the wind breaks down the great trees ; and he let fall a 
shower of stones on the titan divisions like a huge cloud letting 
loose hailstones amidst a flock of birds in a wood. Under the 
avalanche of stones loosed by the King of the Monkeys, the 
titans, their heads shorn of their ears, fell like crumbling mount ains, and whilst the titans were being overthrown by Sugriva, who 
was crushing them as they fell, they cried out. Then Virupaksha, 
armed with his bow, proclaiming his name, leapt down from his 
chariot and that indomitable titan mounted an elephant and, 
advancing thereon, and he, full of vigour, let forth a terrible 
cry and hurled himself on the monkeys. Thereafter he rained a 
shower of formidable darts on Sugriva in the forefront of battle 
and arrested the rout of the titans by reviving their courage. 
Riddled with wounds from the sharp arrows of the titans, that 
Indra of Monkeys, howling with rage, resolved to slay him and, 
281 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
brandishing a tree, that valiant and indomitable monkey leapt 
forward and struck the huge head of his adversary's elephant, and 
under the virulence of that blow, the great tusker sank down 
emitting loud cries. 
Then the courageous titan jumped down from the back of the 
stunned beast and, turning on the monkey, threw himself upon 
him, but he, clad in mail covered with the hide of a bull, un sheathing his sword, with a rapid step, rushed defiantly on 
Sugriva who stood fast, waiting. Then Sugriva met the impact 
of Virupaksha and thereafter let fly a great rock like unto a 
cloud, whereupon that lion among the titans, seeing the stone 
falling, jumped aside and, full of valour, struck the monkey with 
his sword. Pierced by the valiant titan's sword, the monkey lay 
on the ground for a time deprived of consciousness, then, 
suddenly rising to his feet in the great struggle, he whirled his fist 
round and round, bringing it down violently on the titan's chest. 
Wounded by his blows, the night-ranger, enraged, with his 
sword severed Sugriva's armour in the forefront of battle and, 
under the shock, he fell to his knees. Thereupon the monkey, 
picking himself up, gave the titan a terrific blow that resounded 
like thunder, but Virupaksha evaded it skilfully and, with his 
fist, struck Sugriva on the chest. 
Thereafter the monkey king waxed even more furious and, 
seeing that the titan had parried his thrust, sought an opportunity 
to attack him. In bis rage, he struck him a violent blow on the 
temple like unto Indra's thunderbolt which felled him to the 
earth, and the blood flowed from his mouth covering him like 
water from a mountain torrent. Rolling his eyes in fury, 
foaming at the mouth and bathed in blood, he seemed more 
misshapen1 than ever and the monkeys beheld their enemy 
covered with blood, trembling, and rolling from side to side, 
emitting plaintive cries. 
Meanwhile the two valiant armies of monkeys and titans, who 
were fighting one another, began to create a terrible uproar like 
two seas that had burst their banks. 
In the presence of the all-powerful titan, who had been slain 
by the King of the Monkeys, the varied multitude of monkeys 
and titans resembled the Ganges in flood. 
1 A play on the word Virupaksha, which meant ' Distorted '. 
383 
YUDDHA KANDA 
CHAPTER 98 
Makodara is slain by Sugriva 
In that fearful struggle, both armies gradually melted away under 
each others' blows like two lakes drying up under the summer 
heat. The destruction of his forces and the death of Virupaksha 
redoubled the fury of the Lord of the Titans. Seeing his army 
decimated and destroyed by the monkeys, he recognized that 
destiny was opposing him and he became apprehensive. 
Thereafter he addressed Mahodara, who stood near him, 
saying : — " From now on, O Long-armed Warrior, thou art my 
only hope of victory ! Go, triumph over the enemy forces ! 
Display thy heroism to-day ; the time has come to return the 
favours thy master has bestowed on thee ! Fight bravely ! " 
At these words, that foremost of titans, Mahodara replied : — 
" Be it so ! " and rushed on the enemy's army as a butterfly into 
a flame. Then that exceedingly powerful titan, whose ardour 
had been stimulated by the words of his master and also on 
account of his own native valour, began to create carnage among 
the monkeys. 
From their side, the noble-hearted monkeys, arming them selves with enormous stones, penetrated into the ranks of the 
redoubtable titans and slew them all. And Mahodara, at the 
height of fury, with his golden shafts severed the hands, feet 
and thighs of the monkeys in the great struggle and they, after a 
hard fight with the titans, fled to different quarters, some taking 
refuge with Sugriva. 
Witnessing the rout of his powerful army, Sugriva rushed 
upon Mahodara and the Lord of the Monkeys, seizing a huge and 
formidable rock resembling a hill, threw it at him with great 
force, in order to crush him. 
Seeing the stone falling, Mahodara, unmoved, cut it to pieces 
with his arrows. Under the titan's darts, it fell in a thousand 
fragments on the earth so that it resembled a flock of frightened 
vultures. Beholding that rock broken, Sugriva, mad with anger, 
tore up a Sala Tree and flung it at his adversary, who broke it into 
283 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
many pieces. With his shafts, that hero, the scourge of his toes, 
broke the tree, whereupon Sugriva, observing an iron stake 
lying on the ground, brandished the flash ng bar before the eyes 
of the titan and, with one exceedingly violent blow, struck down 
his excellent steeds. 
Leaping down from his great car, its team of horses having 
been slain, the valiant Mahodara, highly provoked, took hold of 
a mace and the two warriors, one armed with an iron bar and the 
other with a mace, approached each other, bellowing like bulls, 
resembling two clouds charged with lightning. In fury, the 
night-ranger, his lustrous mace glittering like the sun, rushed on 
Sugriva and, as the terrible club was falling upon him, the 
extremely valiant leader of the monkeys, his eyes red with 
anger, lifted up his weapon and struck, whereupon the bar 
instantly fell shattered to the earth. Then Sugriva, boiling with 
rage, from the ground picked up a huge club gilded on all sides 
and, brandishing it, hurled it against the mace, striking it, 
whereupon, on the impact, the two missiles broke in pieces and 
fell on the field. 
Their weapons shattered, the two warriors attacked each other 
with blows of their fists and, full of ardour and strength, re sembled two lit braziers. Amidst loud cries, they struck each 
other and, having interchanged blows, rolled on the earth. 
Leaping up immediately, the two pugilists, great champions, 
scourgers of their foes, exhausted each other, whereupon each 
seized hold of a sword that lay within reach and, transported 
with rage, threw themselves upon each other, their weapons 
upraised. Then those two spirited and experienced warriors 
moved rapidly from left to right of one another, each seeking to 
slay his opponent. Meantime the courageous, impetuous and 
wicked Mahodara, proud of his strength, pierced Sugriva's 
heavy mail with his sword whereupon the weapon snapped on 
the impact. Then that elephant among monkeys, with his own 
sword, severed the titan's head bearing a helmet and adorned 
with earrings. 
Beholding their leader lying headless on the ground, the whole 
army of titans melted away and, having slain Mahodara, the 
monkey with his forces began to cheer, whereupon Dashagriva 
grew furious and Raghava was filled with joy. 
284 
YUDDHA KANDA 
With downcast mien, the titans, overwhelmed, all fled away 
mad with terror, but the son of Surya,1 having laid Mahodara 
low, who resembled part of a great mountain, shone with 
effulgence like that orb itself with its inextinguishable brilliance. 
And the hosts of the Gods, Siddhas, Yakshas and also the beings 
who move on the surface of the earth, gazed with great delight 
on the King of the Monkeys, who had achieved that supreme 
victory. 
chapter 99 
The Combat between Angada and Mahaparshwa 
Mahodara having been struck down by Sugriva, the all-powerful 
Mahaparshwa gazed on his slayer, his eyes red with anger and, 
with his shafts, began to sow disorder in AngadVs formidable 
ranks ; and as the wind detaches a fruit from its stalk so did 
that titan sever the upper limbs of the leading monkeys. With 
his darts, he cut off the arms of some and, full of ire, pierced the 
sides of others. Overwhelmed by those shafts, that Mahaparshwa 
loosed upon them, the monkeys grew pale with fright and lost 
courage. 
Then Angada, wishing to give a little respite to his troops, who 
had been trampled upon and decimated by that titan, leapt up 
full of fury like the ocean on the day of the full tide. Seizing an 
iron bar that shone like the rays of the sun, that Prince of the 
Monkeys struck Mahaparshwa in the struggle and he, losing 
consciousness, fell from his chariot, its driver having been slain, 
and lay senseless on the earth. 
Thereupon the mighty King of the Bears who resembled a 
heap of black antimony and was extremely powerful, arming 
himself with a huge rock like unto the peak of a mountain, strode 
ahead of his battalion, which resembled a cloud, and with a 
furious blow struck down the horses and shattered the chariot of 
the titan. 
Mahaparshwa, however, regaining consciousness, leapt up in 
an instant and, in his great vigour, riddled Angada with 
1 Sugriva. 
285 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
innumerable arrows again and again and struck Jambavan, the 
King of the Bears with three spears full in the chest, wounding 
Gavaksha with innumerable shafts. Thereafter Angada, who 
was transported with rage, seized hold of an enormous stake and 
with that iron bar, bright as the rays of the sun, the son of Bali, 
his eyes red with anger, taking hold of it with both hands and 
brandishing it with force, with the intention of slaying him, 
hurled it on Mahaparshwa, who stood some distance off. 
Thrown with force, the bar knocked the bow with its arrows 
from the hand of the titan and struck off his helmet, whereupon 
Angada, with a single bound, seething with rage, struck the titan 
a blow with his clenched fist on the ear, which was adorned with 
an earring. 
Enraged, the valiant and illustrious Mahaparshwa seized hold 
of a great axe in one hand and with that stainless weapon washed 
in oil, made of solid stone, that titan, in a paroxysm of fury, 
struck his antagonist violently, but the blow, falling on the left 
shoulder, glanced off his armour. Then Angada, the equal of his 
sire in valour, furious, lifted up his fist which was as powerful as 
lightning and knowing the vital parts of the body, delivered a 
blow like unto Indra's thunderbolt on the chest of the titan, 
close to his heart. 
On this the titan, his heart riven by the shock, fell dead on that 
vast battlefield, and seeing him lying stretched on the earth 
without life, his army took fright, whilst Ravana fell into a 
transport of rage. 
Thereafter the monkeys with Angada, let forth a joyous 
roaring that resounded far and wide, shattering the gates and 
turrets of Lanka as it were. The Gods too with their king let 
forth a great shout and that enemy of Indra, the Lord of the 
Titans, enraged on hearing the immense uproar among the 
inhabitants of the Celestial Regions and the forests, resolved to 
enter into the lists once more. 
286 
YUDDHA KANDA 
CHAPTER 100 
Rama and Havana fight toith magic Weapons 
Beholding Mahodara and Mahaparshwa slain and, despite his 
great strength, the valiant Virupaksha also struck down, a great rage 
seized Ravana, who urged on his charioteer with these words: — 
" By slaying Rama and Lakshmana I shall remove that double 
scourge, the cause of the slaughter of my faithful adherents and 
the siege of the city. In the fight I shall cut down Rama, that 
tree of which Sita is the flower and the fruit, whose branches are 
Sugriva, Jambavan, Kumuda, Nala, also Dvivida, Mainda, 
Angada, Gandhamadana, Hanuman, Sushena and all the leading 
monkeys." 
Thereupon that mighty car-warrior, who caused the ten 
regions to resound, drove rapidly on Raghava with his chariot, 
and the earth, with its rivers, mountains and woods, trembled 
with the uproar, and the lions, gazelles and birds that inhabited 
it were seized with terror. 
Then Ravana employed a dark and magic weapon that was 
formidable and terrifying and with it he consumed the monkeys, 
who fled hither and thither. Amidst the dust raised by their 
battalions, for they were unable to endure that weapon created 
by Brahma himself, Raghava, seeing those countless divisions 
taking refuge in innumerable places, pursued by Havana's 
powerful shafts, stood ready waiting. 
Meanwhile that Tiger among the Titans, having routed the 
army of monkeys, beheld Rama standing there unconquered 
with his brother Lakshmana, like unto Vasava with Vishnu, and 
Rama seemed to touch the sky as it were as he stretched his great 
bow and those heroes with eyes as large as lotus petals were 
long-armed and the conquerors of their foes. 
From his side the extremely illustrious and valiant Rama, who 
was accompanied by Saumitri, seeing Ravana overwhelming the 
monkeys in the fight, joyfully took hold of the centre of his bow 
and immediately began to bend that excellent weapon that was 
stout and sonorous, riving the earth as it were. 
287 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
At die sound of Havana's loosing a myriad arrows and Rama 
stretching his bow, the titans fell to the ground in their hundreds! 
Thereafter Havana, coming within a bow's length of the two 
princes, resembled Rahu in the presence of the sun and moon. 
Desiring to be the first to enter into combat, Lakshmana with 
his sharp arrows, having placed them on his bow, loosed his 
shafts resembling flames of fire. Hardly had that archer let fly 
his darts into the air than the extremely energetic Ravana stayed 
them in their course, severing one with one, three with three and 
ten with ten, thus demonstrating his lightness of hand. Leaping 
over Saumitri, that triumphant warrior, Ravana approached 
Rama in the conflict, who stood ready like unto an unscalable 
mountain. Bearing down on Raghava, his eyes red with anger, 
the Lord of the Titans loosed a rain of shafts upon him but, with 
the aid of his sharp arrows, Raghava severed those innumerable 
darts that flamed in formidable wise and resembled venomous 
snakes. 
Thereafter Raghava struck Ravana with redoubled blows and 
Ravana struck Raghava and they riddled each other with a hail 
of varied and penetrating missiles and, for a long time, described 
marvellous circles round each other from left to right, over whelming each other with swift arrows, each remaining unde feated. And all beings were seized with terror witnessing that 
desperate duel between those two redoubtable bowmen, the 
equals of Yama and Antaka. The sky was covered with clouds 
riven by lightning flashes and the firmament became, as it were, 
pierced with holes by a rain of whirling arrows of extreme 
velocity, possessing sharp points, adorned with heron's plumes. 
With their darts, they first obscured the sky as when the sun 
withdraws behind the Astachala Mountains and two great 
clouds suddenly appear. 
Thereafter, between those two warriors, each seeking to slay 
die other, an incomparable and unimaginable struggle ensued 
like unto the duel between Vritra and Vasava. Both were 
furnished with excellent bows, both were skilled warriors, both 
brought exceptional knowledge in the science of arms to the fight. 
In all their manoeuvrings they were followed by a stream of 
shafts as the waves in two oceans that are whipped up by a 
tempest. 
YUDDHA KANDA 
Then, with a skilful hand, Ravana, the Destroyer of the 
Worlds, aiming at Rama's forehead, loosed a formidable 
succession of iron shafts from his bow, which Rama received 
unmoved on his head like a garland of lotus leaves. Thereupon, 
reciting a sacred formula, arming himself with Rudra's weapon 
and choosing a large number of spears, full of wrath, the 
illustrious Raghava bent his bow and with force let fly those 
weapons in rapid succession against that Indra of Titans but 
those darts fell without breaking through the armour of Ravana, 
who, like an immense cloud, remained unmoved. 
Then Rama, skilled in the use of arms, struck Ravana afresh 
on the forehead, as he stood in bis chariot, with arrows to which 
he had joined a miraculous weapon, and it appeared as if five headed serpents in the form of darts were penetrating hissing 
into the earth repelled by Ravana whom they sought to devour. 
Thereupon, having rendered Raghava's weapon void, Ravana, in 
a transport of rage, armed himself in his turn with the dreadful 
Asura weapon which he loosed joined to sharp and terrible arrows 
with huge points, having the heads of lions, tigers, herons, geese, 
vultures, falcons, jackals and wolves or resembling serpents with 
five heads. Others had the heads of donkeys, boars, dogs, cocks, 
aquatic monsters and venomous reptiles and those sharp arrows 
were the creation of bis magic power. Struck by the Asuric 
shafts, that lion among the Raghus, he who resembled the God 
of Fire himself, responded with the Agneya Dart that was full of 
power and to it he joined arrows of every kind with points that 
burnt like fire and which resembled suns, planets and stars in 
hue or great meteors like unto naming tongues. Those for midable missiles belonging to Ravana striking against those 
loosed by Rama, disintegrated in space and were annihilated in 
their thousands. 
Thereupon all the valiant monkeys with Sugriva at their head, 
able to change their form at will, beholding the titan's weapon 
destroyed by Rama of imperishable karma, let forth joyous 
acclamations and made a circle round him. 
Then the magnanimous son of Dasaratha, the descendant of 
Raghu, having destroyed that weapon discharged by Ravana's 
own arm, was filled with felicity, whilst the leaders of the mon keys joyfully paid homage to him. 
a*9 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 101 
Ravana flees from Rama 
His weapon having been destroyed, Ravana, the King of the 
Titans, whose fury was redoubled, in his wrath instantly 
produced another j and he loosed the fearful Rudra Weapon, 
forged by Maya, on Raghava. Thereafter, from his bow, 
innumerable spears, maces, naming bars hard as diamond, 
mallets, hammers, chains and spiked clubs, like unto fiery 
thunderbolts, issued forth like the tempests at the dissolution of 
the worlds. 
Then the glorious Raghava, most skilled in the knowledge of 
excellent shafts, that warrior of great renown, broke that weapon 
with the aid of the marvellous Gandharva Dart, and when it was 
shattered by the magnanimous Raghava, Ravana, his eyes red 
with fury, loosed his Solar Weapon whereupon huge and brilliant 
discs issued from the bow of the skilful Dashagriva of redoubtable 
courage, which, falling, lit up the sky on every side and the four 
quarters were consumed by the fell of those filming missiles that 
resembled the sun, moon and stars. 
With a mass of arrows Raghava destroyed those discs and darts 
loosed by Ravana in the fore-front of the battle and, seeing his 
weapon broken, Ravana, the Lord of the Titans with ten arrows 
struck Rama in his vital parts. Struck by ten shafts that Ravana 
had discharged from his great bow, the exceedingly energetic 
Raghava did not flinch and, in his turn, that victorious prince, 
in the height of anger, pierced Ravana in all his limbs with the 
aid of innumerable darts. 
At that instant, the younger brother of Raghava, the valiant 
Lakshmana, slayer of hostile warriors, armed himself with seven 
arrows and, with those exceedingly swift shafts, that illustrious 
prince severed Ravana's standard in many places, which bore the 
image of a man's head. With a single arrow, the fortunate 
l-akshmana of immense vigour, cut off the head adorned with 
brilliant earrings of the titan who drove the chariot, and with 
290 
YUDDHA KANDA 
five sharp arrows severed the bow resembling the trunk of an 
elephant that belonged to the King of the Titans. 
Thereafter Bibishana, bounding forward, with his mace slew 
Ravana's beautiful horses that were as tall as hills and resembled 
a dark cloud in hue, whereupon Dashagriva, leaping quickly 
from his car, the steeds of which having been slain, was filled 
with exceeding wrath against his brother and that powerful and 
spirited monarch loosed a flaming spear on Bibishana like unto a 
thunderbolt, but ere it reached its target, Lakshmana severed it 
with three arrows, whereupon a great cheer arose amongst the 
monkeys in that formidable struggle, and that spear, wreathed in 
gold, fell down shattered in three fragments like unto a great 
meteor falling from the sky amidst a shower of flaming 
sparks. 
Then the titan, that mighty Ravana of wicked soul, armed 
himself wiih another superior and tested spear which Death 
himself would have found hard to resist and which was of 
immense size and shone with its own effulgence. Brandished 
with violence by the mighty Ravana of perverse soul it gave out 
a lurid gleam so that it appeared like forked lightning. 
Meanwhile the valiant Lakshmana, perceiving that Bibishana 
stood in peril of his life, placed himself quickly in front of him 
and that hero, stretching his bow, with a rain of darts riddled 
Ravana, who stood waiting to discharge the weapon he held in 
his hand. Under the shower of arrows with which the courageous 
Saurnitri overwhelmed him, thus frustrating bis design, the 
titan no longer thought of striking him in return. Seeing that he 
had preserved his brother's life, Ravana, who was standing before 
him, addressed him thus : — 
" O Thou whose strength renders thee arrogant, since thou 
hast preserved this titan, my spear shall fall on thee ; having 
pierced thine heart, this bloodstained weapon that mine arm, 
equal to an iron bar, will hurl at thee will rob thee of thy life's 
breath and return to my hand." 
Thus did Ravana, speak and in a paroxysm of rage, 
levelling that pick adorned with eight extremely loud bells, 
created magically by Maya, that was infallible, the slayer of its 
foes, the splendour of which flamed up as it were, hurled it at 
Takshmana with a mighty shout. Loosed with terrible violence 
291 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
and a sound of thunder, that spear fell with force on Lakshmana 
in the forefront of the battle. 
Then Raghava sought to mitigate the power of that weapon 
and said : — 
" May good fortune attend Lakshmana ! May this mortal 
impact be rendered void ! " 
Released by the enraged titan on that indomitable hero, the 
spear which resembled a venomous snake, falling with extreme 
violence, penetrated bis great chest and so brilliant was it that it 
appeared like the tongue of the King of the Serpents. Loosed 
with force by Ravana, that spear penetrated deep into the body 
of Lakshmana who, with his heart pierced, fell on the earth. 
Beholding Lakshmana in that condition, near to whom he 
stood, the extremely powerful Raghava, full of solicitude for his 
brother, felt his heart stricken, but after an instant's reflection, his 
eyes welling with tears, enraged as is Pavaka at the dissolution of 
the world, he thought — ' This is not the time for lamentation ' 
and thereafter he entered once more into the fearful conflict, 
resolved to make a supreme attempt to slay Ravana. 
His eyes fixed on his brother, Rama saw how he had been 
pierced with a spear in the great fight and was covered with 
blood, resembling a mountain with its reptiles. And the most 
vigorous of monkeys sought to draw out that weapon loosed by 
the mighty Ravana, overwhelmed though they were by a hail of 
shafts discharged by the King of the Titans ; the spear, however, 
having passed through Saumitri's body had penetrated into the 
earth. Then Rama, with his powerful hands seized hold of that 
spear and, in his wrath, snapped it, throwing the fragments to a 
great distance and, as he drew it out, Ravana penetrated his 
every limb with his shafts that pierced to his very marrow. 
Ignoring these darts, Rama embraced Lakshmana and said to 
Hanuman and that mighty Monkey Sugriva : — 
" Ye foremost of the monkeys, gather round T^kshmnna ! O 
King of the Monkeys, the time has come for me to manifest my 
prowess ! For long I have sought this occasion ! May the 
wicked Dashagriva of infamous exploits perish ! My longing 
resembles that of the Chatak bird1 on beholding the clouds at the 
end of summer. Ere long, I swear to thee either Ravana or 
1 This bird is said only to quench its thirst at a certain season. 
29Z 
YUDDHA KANDA 
Rama will cease to exist in the world ! Ye shall be witness 
thereof ! The loss of the kingdom, my sojourn in the forest and 
my wanderings in the woods of Dandaka, the insult offered to 
Vaidehi, my encounter with the titans, the great and terrible 
misfortune that has visited me, this torment resembling hell will 
be wiped out this day when I slay Ravana on the battlefield ! He 
on whose account I took the army of monkeys in my train, having 
installed Sugriva, when I had slain Bali in the open field, and on 
whose account I crossed the ocean, having thrown a bridge over 
it, that wretch to-day has come within my range of vision and shall 
therefore cease to live. Appearing before me, Ravana cannot 
survive any more than one who comes into the presence of a 
serpent whose glance is poisonous or a snake falling under 
Vainateya's gaze. Be tranquil witnesses of my combat with 
Ravana, O Invincible Ones, Foremost of the Monkeys ; seat 
yourselves on the brow of the mountain. To-day in this duel, 
the Three Worlds with the Gandharvas, the Siddhas and 
Charanas will recognize Rama's attributes ! I shall accomplish a 
feat that the world with all beings who move or do not move, as 
also the Gods, will recount as long as the earth exists ! " 
Speaking thus Rama began to discharge his penetrating shafts 
embellished with gold at Dashagriva. From his side, Ravana, 
like a cloud from which the rain falls, showered down arrows 
and clubs with violence on Rama. And a mighty uproar arose 
when, in order to slay each other, those marvellous arrows were 
loosed by Rama and Ravana. Severed and scattered, the shafts 
with flaming points discharged by Rama and Ravana fell from 
the sky on the earth, and the twanging of their bows, causing 
great terror amongst all beings, was astonishing to hear. Then 
that amazing hail of missiles, that the mighty hero let fly in 
continuous streams from his burning bow, overwhelmed 
Ravana who, terrified, took to flight like a great cloud driven 
before the tempest. 
293 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 102 
Lakshmana's miraculous Recovery 
Seeing the courageous Lakshmana lying on the battlefield 
drenched in blood, struck down by the spear discharged by the 
mighty Ravana, Rama entered into a terrible duel with that cruel 
titan whom he overwhelmed with a hail of arrows. Then he 
addressed Sushena and said : — 
" The valiant Lakshmana, struck down by the ruthless 
Ravana, is writhing like a serpent, filling me with anguish ! 
When I behold that hero, dearer to me than life itself, how, in 
mine affliction, can I find the strength to fight? If my brother, 
who is endowed with auspicious marks, that proud warrior, 
returns to the five elements, of what use is life or prosperity to 
me ? My prowess is ebbing away as it were and my bow seems 
to be falling from my grasp ; mine arrows are blunted, mine 
eyes blinded with tears, my limbs are heavy as when one is 
overcome by sleep, my thoughts wander and I long to die ! In 
this extreme misfortune in which I am plunged, weeping, my 
mind distracted on seeing my brother, who is emitting inarticulate 
cries, lying in the dust of the battlefield, brought low by the 
wicked Ravana, a prey to suffering and seriously wounded in his 
vital parts, even victory cannot bring me felicity, O Hero. If the 
moon is hidden from sight what delight can it give ? Of what 
use is it to fight ? What purpose is served by living ? The 
combat has no longer any meaning since Lakshmana is lying 
dead in the forefront of the battle. As that illustrious warrior 
followed me when I retired to the forest so will I follow him now 
to the abode of death. 
" Ever affectionate to his kinsfolk, he was undeviatingly 
devoted to me ; I was led to this pass by the titans who have 
made use of magic in the fight. Wives may be found everywhere 
and everywhere one may meet with friends but I see no place 
where one could find so dear a brother. Without Lakshmana of 
what use will it be for me to rule over a kingdom, O Invincible 
Warrior ? What shall I say to Sumitra who loves her son so 
294 
YUDDHA KANDA 
tenderly ? I shall not be able to endure the reproaches with 
which she will address me. What shall I say to my mother 
Kaushalya or even to Kaikeyi ? What answer shall I give to 
Bharata and the exceedingly powerful Shatrughna ? Having 
gone with him to the forest, how can I return without him ? 
Better were it to die than suffer the censure of my family. What 
sin did I commit in a former life that my virtuous brother is 
now lying dead before mine eyes ? O My Brother, O Foremost 
of Men, O First of Heroes, O Prince, why, forsaking me, wilt 
thou repair to the other regions ? How comes it that thou dost 
not answer me who am lamenting ? Rise, look about thee, why 
dost thou remain lying there ? Witness my grief with thine own 
eyes ! In my despair, be my comforter, O Long-armed Warrior, 
overwhelmed as 1 am with anguish, wandering distracted amidst 
the woods and mountains." 
As Rama was speaking thus, overwhelmed with affliction, 
Sushena, in order to comfort him, addressed these well considered words to him : — 
" O Tiger among Men, abandon this idea that causes thee 
pain, this thought that pierces thine heart as a javelin in the 
forefront of the battle. Kay, Lakshmana, the enhancer of 
prosperity, has not rejoined the five elements for his features 
have not changed nor is he pale, rather is his countenance 
serene and handsome ! Observe how the palms of his hands 
resemble the petals of a lotus and his eyes are bright. Those who 
appear thus have not yielded up their lives, O Lord of all Men ! 
Do not grieve O Hero, Conqueror of thy Foes, Lakshmana 
lives, and the proofs are the multiple beatings of his heart united 
with his sighs even though his body lies stretched on the earth." 
Thus spoke the extremely sagacious Sushena to Raghava and 
thereafter he addressed that great monkey, Hanuman, who stood 
near and said : — 
" O Friend, go quickly, repair to the Mountain Mahodaya 1 
Formerly thou hast heard of it from Jambavan, O Warrior ! On 
the southern peak grow curative herbs, the plants named 
Vishalyakarani, Savarnyakarani, Samjivakarani and also Samd hani of great virtue. Bring them back, O Warrior, in order to 
revive that hero, Lakshmana." 
At these words, Hanuman repaired to the Mountain of Herbs 
»95 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
but there he became anxious, for that illustrious monkey could 
not recognize those remedial plants. Then the thought came to 
Maruti, whose strength was immeasurable, * I will carry back 
the peak of the mountain for it is on the summit that the aus picious herbs are growing, at least I infer so from what Sushena 
has said. If I return without having picked the Vishalyakarani, 
the loss of time will prove fatal and a great misfortune will 
follow.* 
Reflecting thus, the mighty Hanuman hastened on his way 
and when he reached that high mountain, he shook the summit 
three times and having broken it off, balanced it, with its multi tudinous trees in full flower of varying fragrance, in his two hands. 
Thereafter, like a dark cloud charged with rain, that monkey 
sprang into the air carrying the mountain peak and returned in 
great haste setting it down and, having rested awhile, he said to 
Sushena : — 
" I am not conversant with the medicinal plants, O Bull 
among Monkeys, here is the whole summit which I have brought 
to thee ! " 
At these words of the son of Pavana, Sushena, the foremost of 
the monkeys, having uprooted the herb, took hold of it and there 
was great amazement among the monkeys witnessing Hanuman's 
feat which even the Gods themselves could only have accom plished with difficulty. 
Then the foremost of monkeys, Sushena, having crushed that 
herb, held it to Lakshmana's nostrils and on inhaling it that 
prince, the scourge of his foes, who was riddled with arrows, 
instantly rose from the ground released from the darts and his 
sufferings. Meanwhile the monkeys beholding him standing 
erect cried out ' Excellent 1 Excellent ! and, full of joy, paid 
homage to him. 
Then Rama, the slayer of his foes, said to Lakshmana : — 
" Come, Come ! " and, embracing him, pressed him close to 
his heart, his eyes wet with tears. Thereafter, having embraced 
him, Raghava said to Saumitri : — " O Hero, what good fortune 
to see thee return from the dead ! Nay, assuredly neither life 
nor Sita nor victory had any attraction for me ; in sooth what 
reason had I for living since thou hadst returned to the five 
elements ? " 
296 
YUDDHA KANDA 
Then Lakshmana, pained, answered the magnanimous 
Raghava who had spoken thus and, in a voice trembling with 
emotion, said :— 
" Bound by thy vow, O Thou who hast truth for thy prowess, 
it does not become thee to utter such cowardly words ! Nay, 
those who speak with sincerity do not render a promise void and 
the proof they give is the fulfilment of their vow ! Thou 
shouldst not give way to despair on mine account, O Irre proachable Hero ! Mayest thou redeem thy word by Ravana's 
death this day. Nay, when he comes within the range of thy 
shafts, thine adversary must not return alive, as a great elephant 
may not live when he falls under the sharp tooth of a roaring 
lion. I desire to see that wretch perish ere the orb of the day 
withdraws behind the Astachala Mountain, his task accomplished . 
If thou seekest the death of Ravana on the battlefield, if thou 
wishest to fulfil thy duty and if thou dost aspire to re-capture the 
princess, O Illustrious Hero, do what I tell thee without delay." 
CHAPTER 103 
Rama and Ravana renew their Combat 
Hearing Lakshmana's words, the valiant Raghava, the destroyer 
of hostile warriors, at the head of his forces, took up his bow and 
stretching it allowed a shower of his formidable shafts to fall on 
Ravana. 
From his side, the Lord of the Titans, mounted on his chariot, 
rushed on Kakutstha, as Svarbhanu on Bhaskara ; and Dasha griva, standing in his car, assailed Rama with darts like unto 
lightning, as a great cloud covers a huge mountain with its 
floods. Then Rama, with his arrows that were decorated with 
gold and resembled naming brands, overwhelmed Dashagriva 
with them on the battlefield. 
On this the Gods, Gandharvas and Kinneras declared : — 
' This combat is unequal, Rama is on foot whilst the titan is in a 
chariot ! ' whereupon the foremost of the Gods, the blessed 
Shakra, having heard the words of the Immortals* called Matali 
to him and said : — 
»97 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
" With my chariot repair speedily to where the illustrious 
Raghava is fighting on foot ! Go to the battlefield and invite him 
to ascend this car ; do thou render this signal service to the Gods ! " 
On this command from his king, Matali, the celestial chariot eer, bowing, made answer, saying : — 
" With all speed I go to fulfil my duty as a charioteer ! " 
Thereupon he harnessed the bay horses to the most handsome 
of cars, the body of which being wrought with gold and hung 
with hundreds of little bells, with its emerald shafts shone like 
the rising sun, and it was yoked to excellent dappled steeds 
flecked with white, caparisoned in gold, their coats gleaming 
like the orb of day. A standard fluttered on a golden staff over 
that marvellous car belonging to Indra and, under the order of 
the King of the Gods, Matali ascended it and, leaving the 
Celestial Regions, went to meet Kakutstha. Armed with a lash, 
standing in the car, Matali, the charioteer of that God of a 
Thousand Eyes, having paid obeisance to him with joined palms, 
said to Rama : — 
" Saharaksha,1 O Kakutstha, O Renowned Destroyer of thy 
Foes, has lent thee this car so that thou mayest be victorious ! 
Here too is Indra's great bow, his shield bright as fire, his arrows 
shining like the sun and his goodly spear well-burnished ! Ascend 
the chariot, O Warrior, and with me as thy charioteer, triumph 
over the Titan Ravana, as did Mahendra over the Danavas ! " 
Thus addressed, Rama whose splendour illumines the 
worlds, circumambulated the car and, bowing, ascended it. 
Thereafter a wonderful combat of chariots ensued between the 
long-armed Rama and the Titan Ravana, causing the hair to 
stand on end. 
Raghava, skilled in the use of powerful arrows, fought with 
the King of the Titans, matching Gandharva Weapon against 
Gandharva Weapon and Celestial Arrow against Celestial Arrow. 
Then the royal night-ranger, in a paroxysm of fury let fly a 
formidable missile on his rival, marvellous, dreadful, befitting a 
demon. Loosed from Ravana's bow, those shafts, decorated 
with gold, falling on Kakutstha, were transformed into serpents 
of subde venom and those fearful monsters with brassy faces, 
vomiting searing flames from their gaping mouths, sprang on 
1 The Lord of a Thousand Eyes, Indra. 
YUDDHA KANDA 
Rama, and those reptiles whose contact was equal to Vasufci of 
iron coils and violent poison, enveloped all regions on every side 
filling the whole of space. 
Seeing those serpents falling on him in the fight, Rama chose 
the dreadful and appalling Garuda Weapon and discharged it. 
Leaving Raghava's bow, those golden-hafted arrows, brilliant as 
flames, transformed themselves into golden eagles, slayers of 
serpents, and all the darts in the form of snakes were destroyed 
by arrows in the shape of birds, that belonged to Rama, who was 
able to change his form at will. 
Enraged at the destruction of his weapon, Ravana, the Lord of 
the Titans, caused a shower of formidable shafts to fall on Rama 
and while he was riddling Rama of imperishable exploits with 
thousands of darts, he wounded Matali with countless others. 
Thereafter, having aimed at the golden standard, Ravana 
shattered it with a single shaft and the golden device fell from 
the height of the chariot to the floor. With a series of arrows he 
struck Indra's steeds, to the exceeding terror of the Gods, 
Gandharvas, Charanas and also the Danavas and, seeing Rama 
wounded, the Siddhas and great Rishis were troubled as also 
the King of the Monkeys and Bibishana. 
When the moon of Rama was concealed from their sight by 
Rahu in the form of Ravana, Budha, in the constellation of 
Prajapati, rushed on Rohini, the beloved of Shashin, to the 
misfortune of all beings. With its mist-wreathed waves, 
naming as it were, the ocean, surging up in fury, seemed to touch 
the orb of day ; and the sun in the grasp of the Planet Dhumak etu assumed a brassy hue dreadful to behold, its rays extin guished, revealing a headless trunk on its disc ; Angaraka too 
was in opposition to the brilliant star of the Koshalas, the 
presiding Deities of which being Indra and Agni ; and in die 
heavens, that planet tormented Vishaka also, and Dashagriva 
with his ten faces and twenty arms, equipped with his bow, 
looked like the Mountain Mainaka. 
Meanwhile Rama, overwhelmed by that ten-necked demon, 
was unable to loose his arrows in the conflict and, knitting his 
brows, enraged, his eyes inflamed, was transported with anger 
and it seemed as if he would consume the titan. 
On seeing the furious countenance of the virtuous Rama, 
299 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
all beings were seized with terror, the earth shook, the moun tains, frequented by lions and tigers, trembled, the trees 
swayed to and fro, the Ocean, that Lord of Rivers was agitated 
and flocks of crows, braying like donkeys, described circles 
in the sky on all sides. 
Beholding Rama wrought up with extreme ire and those 
fearful portents, all beings were filled with fear and Ravana too 
felt dismayed. The Gods in their chariots, the Gandharvas, the 
great Serpents, the Rishis, the Danavas, Daityas and winged 
creatures of the air gazed down on that conflict between those 
two warriors, who fought with every kind of dreadful weapon, 
so that it appeared like the dissolution of the worlds. Suras and 
Asuras who had come to witness the struggle, with their eyes 
followed that formidable duel, uttering words of sympathy and 
encouragement and the assembled Asuras cried out to Dasha griva * Victory to Thee ! • and the Suras addressing Rama 
reiterated ' Triumph ! Triumph ! * 
At that instant the wicked Ravana, in his fury against Rama 
whom he wished to slay, took hold of an immense weapon that 
was as hard as diamond, deafening, the destroyer of its foe, 
furnished with spikes like unto mountain peaks, dreadful to 
conceive or behold, and Ravana lifted up that lance with its 
smoke-wreathed flaming point, like unto the fires at the time of 
the final dissolution of the worlds, that was greatly to be feared, 
irresistible and which death itself could not endure, the terror of 
all beings, whom it was able to crush to fragments. At the height 
of anger, he raised his strong arm and, surrounded by his brave 
troops, brandishing his weapon, that colossus, his eyes red with 
fury, emitted a piercing cry in order to encourage his forces, and 
earth, sky and the four quarters trembled at that fearful shout 
of the King of the Titans. With his stout arm, taking hold of 
that weapon he emitted a great cry and addressed his opponent 
insolently in these words :— 
" This spear, as strong as a diamond, O Rama, that I wield in 
my wrath, through my prowess will shortly rob thee and thy 
brother of your lives ! Thou shalt share the fate of my brave 
soldiers whom thou didst massacre in the forefront of the 
battle. Stay therefore that I may strike thee down with this 
lance, O Raghava." 
300 
YUDDHA KANDA 
At these words, the King of the Titans hurled his weapon at 
Rama, and loosed by Havana's hand, that lance wreathed in 
lightning, deafening with its eight bells, passed through the air 
with a blinding flash. 
Seeing that naming spear, formidable to behold, Rama 
stretched his bow and discharged an arrow with force, but as the 
spear fell, Raghava loosed a mass of arrows to intercept it, so 
that he appeared like Vasava with his floods seeking to stay the 
encroachment of the fires at the end of the world period. As 
butterflies are consumed by flames, so were those shafts con sumed by Havana's huge spear ; then Raghava, seeing his aerial 
shafts reduced to ashes, pulverized by contact with that lance, 
was transported with anger and furious in the extreme. There after Rama, Joy of the House of Raghu, took up his spear 
favoured by Vasava, that Matali had brought to him ; wielding 
it with his powerful arm, that lance, the destroyer of the worlds, 
with its sonorous bells lit up the sky like unto a brilliant meteor. 
In its flight, colliding with the spear belonging to that Indra of 
the Titans, it was shattered by the impact and that enormous 
lance fell bereft of its splendour. Thereafter Rama pierced 
Ravana's swiftly-moving steeds with shafts loosed with great 
force that were thunderous and flew straight to their target. 
Displaying all his strength, he wounded his rival in the breast 
with penetrating javelins and his brow with three arrows, 
whereupon Havana, his whole body pierced with arrows and 
covered with blood, which flowed from wounds in all his limbs, 
resembled an Ashoka Tree in full flower. His body riddled with 
darts loosed by Rama, bathed in blood, feeling himself utterly 
exhausted, that Lord of the Rangers of the Night, in the midst 
of his army, was filled with extreme wrath. 
CHAPTER 104 
Rama arraigns Havana and reproaches him for his Misdeeds 
Grievously wounded by the wrathful Kakutstha, Ravana, that 
proud warrior fell into a great rage. His eyes flaming with 
anger, that titan raised his bow in a paroxysm of fury and in that 
301 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
great combat, overwhelmed Raghava with blows. Like unto a 
heavy shower, Ravana deluged Rama as clouds fill a pond. 
Drowned in a rain of arrows loosed from the titan's bow in the 
fight, Kakutstha stood firm like unto a mighty mountain. 
Then that hero, resolute in combat, with his shafts deflected 
the succession of darts which fell upon him like unto the rays of 
the sun. Thereafter, with a skilled hand, the ranger of the night, 
in fury, struck the breast of the magnanimous Raghava with 
thousands of darts and the elder brother of Lakshmana, covered 
with blood, looked like a huge Kimshuka Tree in flower in the 
forest. His wrath roused by the wounds he had received, the 
exceedingly powerful Kakutstha armed himself with shafts the 
lustre of which resembled the sun's at the end of the world 
period ; and Rama and Ravana, both transported with anger, 
became invisible to each other on the battlefield that was 
darkened by their shafts. 
Thereafter at the height of fury, the valiant son of Dasaratha 
addressed his adversary in these mocking and ironic words : — 
" Having carried away my consort against her will in Janas thana, imposing on her ignorance, thou art verily no hero ! 
Bearing away by force, Vaidehi who was wandering forlornly in 
the great forest far from me, thou thinkest * I am a great hero ! * 
Because thou hast molested other women who were without a 
protector, which is the act of a coward, thou deemest thyself to 
be a hero, O Valiant One ! O Thou who hast overthrown the 
ramparts of duty, O Arrogant Wretch of fickle nature, in thine 
insolence, thou hast invited death into thine house, saying ' I am 
a hero ! ' Is it in the role of the valiant brother of Dhanada that 
thou, grown presumptuous on account of power, hast accom plished this memorable, great and glorious exploit? Thou 
shalt presently receive a fitting recompense for this infamous act. 
0 Wretch, in thine own estimation, thinking to thyself 'lama 
hero/ thou wast not ashamed to bear Sita away like a thief. Had 
1 been there when thou didst affront Vaidehi, handling her so 
brutally, I should have dispatched thee to rejoin thy brother 
Khara by striking thee down with my shafts. By good fortune, 
O Insensate One, thou art now before me ; to-day with my 
penetrating darts, I shall hurl thee into Yama's abode. To-day 
thy head with its dazzling earrings, severed by my weapon, shall 
302 
YUDDHA KANDA 
roll in the dust on the battlefield where the wild beasts will 
devour it. Vultures will swoop on thy breast when thou art 
lying stretched on the earth, O Ravana, and will drink the blood 
greedily that flows from the wounds inflicted by my sharp arrows. 
To-day pricked by my shares, lying without life, birds of prey 
will tear out thine entrails as eagles destroy serpents ! ** 
Speaking thus, the valiant Rama, scourge of his foes, covered 
that Indra among Titans, who stood near, with a hail of arrows, 
and his courage, strength and martial ardour in loosing his 
shafts was redoubled. Then all the celestial weapons belonging 
to Raghava, versed in the Science of the Self, presented them selves before him1 and, in his joy, that illustrious hero felt the 
dexterity of his touch increase. 
On these auspicious signs appearing of themselves, Rama, the 
Destroyer of the Titans, attacked Ravana himself with increasing 
violence. 
Wounded by innumerable rocks thrown by the monkeys and 
the darts showered upon him by Raghava, Dashagriva's heart 
fainted within him and, in the agitation of his soul, he neither 
took up his arrows nor stretched his bow nor sought to oppose 
Rama's valour, while the arrows and missiles of every kind 
discharged unceasingly by his adversary had death as their 
target so that the hour of his doom appeared imminent. 
Then his charioteer, observing the peril, drove the chariot 
calmly and slowly out of the tray and, aghast at the appearance 
of the king, who had sunk down bereft of energy, he turned that 
dreadful car, rumbling like a cloud, and left the battlefield 
in haste. 
CHAPTER 105 
Ravana reproaches Us Charioteer 
Distracted with fury, his eyes red with anger, urged on by 
destiny, Ravana addressed his charioteer, saying : — 
"Am I then bereft of valour and strength, deprived of prowess, 
cowardly, infirm of purpose, weak, without energy, devoid of 
1 That is the Deities presiding over them presented themselves before Rama. 
303 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
magic powers and debarred from combat, that thou hast failed 
me and actest on thine own understanding ? How comes it that 
without respect for me and disregarding my commands, in the 
presence of the foe, thou didst drive my chariot from the field ! 
Through thine error this day, O Vile Wretch, that which I had 
won over a long period, glory, valour, honour and renown, are all 
lost to me ! Before a foe famed for his prowess, who prides 
himself on his exploits, thou hast transformed me who delights 
in battle, into a coward. If it is not through heedlessness that 
thou hast acted thus, O Villain, my suspicions are well founded 
and thou hast been bribed by the enemy. Assuredly it was not 
an act of friendship or devotion ; only a foe would conduct 
himself as thou hast done. If thou hast any loyalty to me, then 
return in the chariot instantly ere mine adversary has departed 
and remember the benefits thou hast received m my hands." 
At these reproaches from the insensate Ravana, the sagacious 
charioteer made answer in words that were moderate and full of 
good sense, saying : — 
"lam neither afraid, nor am I mad, nor do I yield to the 
solicitations of a foe, nor am I negligent, nor have I ceased to be 
loyal to thee, nor have I forgotten the benefits I have received 
from thy hand ! It was through my desire to be of service to 
thee and to safeguard thy glory and on account of a sincere 
attachment, that I acted as I thought best ! O Great King, thou 
shouldst not unjustly regard me as a vile and cowardly wretch, I 
who seek only to do that which is agreeable to thee. Hear me, I 
will tell thee the reason why I took thy chariot, resembling a 
flowing current driven back by the tide, from the field. 
" Observing thy fatigue following on the tremendous struggle, 
I no longer recognized thy proud assurance nor thy superior 
strength. By drawing the chariot unceasingly, my steeds were 
overcome with fatigue, they were prostrate and overcome with 
the heat, like unto kine lashed by the rain ; furthermore 
amidst the portents that were manifest in great numbers, not 
one, it seemed to me, was favourable to us. 
" One should at the proper time and place observe the 
characteristics, gestures, facial expression, depression or ex hilaration and the measure of fatigue of one's master, O Mighty 
Hero ; also the place where the earth is firm and where it is 
304 
YUDDHA KANDA 
uneven or level, where it is flat or hilly and the time for combat ; 
when the enemy lays himself open to attack, how to advance and 
retire, to halt or go forward, to meet the enemy or retreat to a 
distance, all this must be known by a charioteer, as he stands in 
his chariot. 
" It was on account of thy prostration and the exhaustion of 
thy steeds and in order to mitigate this terrible fatigue, that I 
undertook those specific measures. It was not from caprice, O 
Warrior, that I drove the chariot away ; it was devotion to my 
lord that made me resolve to act in this wise. Issue any command 
thou desirest, O Hero, O Scourge of Thy Foes, and I shall 
fulfil it implicitly with all my heart ! " 
Then Havana, fully satisfied with the reply of his charioteer, 
addressed many words of praise to him and, in his martial ardour, 
said: — 
" Speedily drive my chariot towards Raghava, O Charioteer, 
Ravana is incapable of turning back ere he has destroyed his 
enemies in battle ! " 
Speaking thus, the King of the Titans standing in his chariot, 
bestowed a brilliant ring of great price on his charioteer and, 
under his orders, the driver set out to the battlefield. Urged on 
by Ravana's command, the charioteer whipped his steeds into 
a gallop and, in an instant, the great chariot belonging to that 
Indra among the Titans stood before Rama in the field. 
chapter xo6 
The Sage Agastya instructs Rama in the Hymn to the Sun1 
Meanwhile, seeing Rama exhausted by the fight, standing 
absorbed in thought on the battlefield, and Ravana, racing 
him, preparing to begin the encounter anew, the blessed 
Agastya who had joined the Gods, and also come there to 
witness the great combat, approached that hero and said : — 
" Rama, Rama, O Long-armed Warrior, hearken to the 
eternal secret which will enable thee to overcome all thine 
1 Hymn to the Sun, 'Adityalmdaya ', the designation of a Vodic Hymn. 
305 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
adversaries. It is none other than the * Hymn to the Sun,* O 
Dear Child, it is sacred, capable of subduing the foe and brings 
victory ; this prayer is eternal, imperishable, exalted and aus picious, the delight of the good, the destroyer of all ills, the 
allayer of fear and anxiety, the increaser of life and the most 
excellent of all verses : — 
** * O Thou, who on rising art crowned with rays, to whom the 
Devas and Asuras pay homage, salutations to Thee ! Thou art 
Vivisvata, the resplendent Lord of the Worlds, the Soul of the 
Gods, the Effulgent One, Creator of Light, who sustainest the 
Hosts of Devas and Asuras and the Three Worlds with Thy 
rays. Thou art the Creator, Maintainer and Destroyer, Thou 
art the God of War, the Lord of Creatures, the King of the 
Celestials, the Distributor of Wealth. Thou art Time and 
Death, the One possessed of splendour, the Lord of the Waters, 
the Ancestors, the Vasus, the Sadhyas, the Maruts, Manu, 
Vayu and the God of Fire. Thou art the Source of Life and of 
the seasons, Thou art the Great Nourisher of all, the Generator 
of all, the Courser in the heavens, the Maintainer, the One 
possessed of rays, the Golden, the Brilliant, the Cosmic Energy, 
the Mater of Day. Thou art all-pervading, myriad-rayed, the 
Indicator of all paths, from whom proceed the senses, Thou art 
the Thousand-beamed One, the Subduer of Darkness, the One 
from Whom all happiness proceeds, the Remover of the suffer ings of Thy votaries, the Inruser of life in the Mundane Egg, the 
One possessed of rays. Thou art the Cause of the Creation, 
Preservation and Destruction of the Universe, the Beneficent 
One, the Possessor of Wealth, the Bringer of Day, the Teacher, 
the Fire-wombed,1 the Son of Aditi, Thou art supreme Felicity, 
the Remover of Nescience, the Lord of the Firmament, the 
Dispeller of Darkness, the One versed in the Rik, Yajus and 
Sama (Vedas), the One from Whom floweth the showers, the 
Friend of Waters, the One Who, with a single bound, crossed the 
Vindhya Range. Thou art intent on creating the Cosmos ; 
Thou art adorned with gems ; Thou art the Bringer of Death, 
the Pingala,* the Destroyer of all, the Omniscent One, Whose 
form is the Universe, of great energy, beloved of all, Lord of all 
1 Fire-wombed — Who has the Fire of Doom in his womb. 
* Pingala — The motive power of the Ping&la vein. 
306 
YUDDHA KANDA 
actions. O Thou, the Lord of stars, planets and constellations, 
the Creator of all, the Resplendent among the splendid, the 
Essence of the twelve forms,1 salutations to Thee ! Salutations 
to the Eastern and Western Mountains, salutations to the Lord 
of the stellar bodies and the Lord of Day ! Salutations to Thee, 
the bringer of victory and the joy that springeth from victory, O 
Lord of the Golden Steeds ! Salutations to Thee, O Thousand rayed One, O Aditya ! Salutations to Thee Who controlleth the 
senses, to Thee O Hero Who art worthy of the Holy Syllable,3 
salutations to Thee Who awakeneth the Lotus ! Salutations to 
Thee, O Fierce One, Who art the Lord of Brahma, Ishana and 
Achyuta ! To Thee, O Sun, Possessor of Light, Thou of 
illumining power, the Devourer of all, Who assumest the form 
of Rudra, be our salutations ! Salutations to Thee, the Des troyer of darkness, of cold and of the foe ; salutations to Thee of 
Infinite Soul, the Destroyer of the ungrateful, the Lord of the 
Stars ; salutations to Thee, Whose lustre resembles refined gold, 
the Destroyer of ignorance, the Architect of the universe. 
Salutations to Thee, the Remover of darkness, the Illuminer, 
the Beholder of all the worlds. It is Thou Who Greatest all and 
destroyeth all, Who dryeth up, consumest and annihilates all. 
Thou wakest when all creatures sleep, in whose heart Thou 
abidest ; Thou art both the Sacrificial Fire and the fruit of 
sacrifice. Thou art the sum of all action and the Lord 
thereof.* 
" O Raghava, he who recites this hymn in the time of peril, in 
the midst of the wilderness or in any danger does not succumb 
to it. Do thou offer a deep devotion to that God of Gods, the 
Lord of the World ! He who recites this hymn three times will 
be victorious ! O Long-armed Warrior, the hour has come 
when thou wilt triumph over Ravana ! " 
Having spoken thus, Agastya returned whence he had come. 
These words dispelled the grief of the illustrious Raghava who 
felt himself fortified, full of ardour and well pleased. Thereafter 
meditating on Aditya he recited the hymn and experienced 
supreme felicity. Having rinsed his mouth three times and 
purified himself, that hero took up his bow. Seeing Ravana, he 
1 Twelve Forma — The twelve months. 
* The Holy Syllable— The Pranava *Aum '. 
307 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
rejoiced and advanced towards him in order to enter into combat, 
calling up his whole strength with the intention of slaying him. 
At that instant the Deity of the Sun, amidst the Host of the 
Gods, knowing that the destruction of the Lord of the Rangers 
of the Night was at hand, casting glances of joy and supreme 
satisfaction on Rama, approached him and said : — " Put forth 
thine whole strength ! " 
chapter 107 
Sinister Portents appear 
Thereafter Ravana's charioteer drove his car forward speedily, 
with joy, eating up space as it were, and that chariot, capable of 
crushing hostile armies, bore an immense standard and resem bled the City of the Gandharvas. Harnessed to excellent steeds, 
garlanded with gold, it was filled with implements of war and 
adorned with fags and banners. The scourge of enemy forces 
and the joy of its own, Ravana's car was driven with exceeding 
velocity by its charioteer. 
Then that prince of men, Rama, observed the chariot of the 
King of the Titans, rolling noisily along with its great standard, 
harnessed to dreadful black horses and resembling a Vimana1 in 
space, bright as the sun, dazzling to behold, like unto Indra's 
bow, and the rain of arrows falling therefrom resembled the 
waters loosed by a cloud. Seeing the chariot of his adversary, 
which bore down upon him like a cloud, with a sound resembling 
a mountain shattered by lightning, Rama instantly stretching his 
bow, like unto the crescent moon, said to Matali, the charioteer 
of that God of a Thousand Eyes : — 
" O Matali, behold the furious pace of the chariot of mine 
adversary as he rushes upon me in violent rage ! Be vigilant 
and drive to meet the car of my foe, I wish to destroy him as the 
wind scatters a rising cloud ! Without swerving or confusion, 
thy glance alert, thy mind steady, holding the reins with a firm 
hand, drive swiftly I Assuredly thou hast no need of my counsel, 
1 Vimana — A celestial chariot, seat or abode. 
308 
YUDDHA KANDA 
accustomed as thou art to drive Purandara's chariot, yet in mine 
ardent desire to enter into combat, I make appeal to thine 
experience, I do not instruct thee." 
Extremely gratified by Rama's words, Matali, the most 
excellent charioteer of the Gods increased the speed of his car. 
Passing Ravana's great chariot on the right hand, he covered it 
with the dust of his own wheels. 
Enraged, Dashagriva, his eyes inflamed with anger, riddled 
Rama with arrows as he stood before him. Provoked by the 
blows, Rama, whose strength was redoubled by his fury, armed 
himself with Indra's extremely powerful bow and his great 
arrows of exceeding swiftness that glittered like the rays of the 
sun. Thereupon a fierce combat ensued between the two 
warriors, who stood face to face like two proud lions, each 
desirous of destroying die other. 
At that moment, Devas, Gandharvas, Siddhas and Para marishis, hoping for Ravana's downfall, assembled to witness 
that duel between those chariots. 
Thereafter dreadful portents appeared, causing the hair to 
stand on end, foreshadowing death to Ravana and victory to 
Raghava. And the Gods caused blood to fall on Ravana's 
chariot ; a great whirlwind blew from left to right whilst, in the 
sky, a large flock of vultures flew over his head following the 
evolutions of his car. Though still day, Lanka, enshrouded in 
the light of dusk, hued like a Japa flower, seemed aglow ; great 
meteors accompanied by lightning fell with the sound of thunder 
and the titans were seized with terror witnessing those portents 
so unfavourable to Ravana. In whatever direction the titan 
drove, the earth shook and the limbs of his soldiers appeared as 
if paralysed. The rays of the sun falling before Ravana seemed 
to him coppery, yellow and white, like unto mountain ores, and 
the vultures and jackals who pursued him, their jaws vomiting 
flames, began to howl on beholding bis lugubrious and downcast 
mien distorted with anger. Contrary winds blew raising clouds 
of dust on the battlefield, so that the King of the Titans was 
unable to distinguish anything. Indra loosed his thunderbolts 
on all sides on his army with an unendurable sound, without a 
single threatening cloud appearing ; all the cardinal points were 
enveloped in darkness and a dense cloud of dust hid the sky. 
x 309 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Dreadful birds1 fought desperately among themselves, falling in 
hundreds before his chariot, emitting fearful cries. From his 
horses' flanks sparks flew continually and from their eyes tears 
fell, fire and water thus issuing from them simultaneously. 
Many other terrifying portents, foretelling Ravana's death, 
appeared, whilst omens propitious to Rama, foreshadowing his 
imminent triumph, could be seen. 
Beholding those inauspicious signs, Raghava was greatly 
delighted and regarded Ravana as already slain. Seeing those 
portents relating to himself, which he knew how to interpret, 
Rama experienced supreme felicity and, full of confidence, 
manifested a matchless energy in the struggle. 
chapter 108 
The Fluctuations of Combat 
Then the desperate duel of chariots between Rama and Ravana 
broke out with increased fury so that all the worlds were seized 
with terror. 
The battalions of titans and innumerable companies of 
monkeys stood motionless with weapons in their hands and, 
beholding those two warriors, man and titan, all were amazed, 
their hearts beating rapidly. Ready for combat, their arms filled 
with every kind of missile, they stood absorbed in the spectacle, 
forgetting to loose their shafts at one another, and the titans had 
their eyes riveted on Ravana and the monkeys on Rama so that 
both armies took on a strange aspect. 
Meanwhile, witnessing those portents, both Raghava and 
Ravana, steady, resolute and full of anger, fought with deter mined courage. ' I shall triumph ' reflected Kakutstha, * I 
must die ' thought Ravana and both displayed their full strength 
with assurance in the encounter. 
At that instant, Dashagriva, in his wrath, placed his arrows 
(on the bow) and loosed them with force m the direction of the 
standard on Raghava's chariot but those missiles failed to reach 
the flag in Purandara's car and, glancing off the support, fell 
1 Sharikas — Turdas Salica or Gracula Religtosa. 
310 
YUDDHA KANDA 
on the earth. Meanwhile Rama, enraged, stretched his bow with 
energy, resolving to return blow for blow and, aiming at Ravana's 
banner, loosed a sharp arrow resembling a great snake, irresistible, 
shining in its own lustre ; and he let fly his weapon in the direction 
of Dashagriva's standard, which being severed, fell to the earth. 
Beholding his flag torn down and overthrown, the extremely 
powerful Ravana, inflamed with ire, blazed with wrath and 
indignation and, under the goad of his fury, let fall a hail of 
flaming shafts, striking Rama's horses. These celestial steeds, 
however, did not flinch, remaining motionless as if brushed by 
lotus stalks and, seeing the horses unaffrighted, Ravana, enraged, 
discharged a fresh rain of arrows, maces, iron bars, discus, 
clubs, rocks, trees, spears and axes, and those weapons were all 
created by magic, and, summoning up all his powers, he loosed 
them in hundreds and thousands. Appalling and terrible was 
that unending flood of weapons re-echoing with a sinister sound 
but Ravana failed to strike Rama's chariot, though his shafts fell 
on the monkey host on all sides covering the whole of space, and 
thus Dashagriva, unheeding, fought on. 
Seeing him deploying increasing efforts in the struggle, 
Kakutstha, as if smiling, took up his sharp arrows and loosed 
them in hundreds and thousands. Observing them fall, Ravana, 
with his shafts, covered the entire sky and, on account of that 
rain of dazzling missiles loosed by those two antagonists, it 
seemed as if a second heaven of weapons had been created and, 
amongst them, there was not one that did not attain its target, 
not one, that did not pierce another and not one, that was loosed 
in vain ; and, having collided with one another, they fell to the 
ground. 
Thus Rama and Ravana fought with an increasing supply of 
weapons and, in the struggle, they showered down their spears 
without pause to right and left, so that these formidable weapons 
covered the firmament ; Rama striking Ravana's steeds and 
Ravana striking those belonging to Rama ; thus, both exchanged 
blow for blow and both, in the height of anger, entered upon a 
tremendous duel causing the hair to stand on end. Then with 
sharpened arrows Rama and Ravana continued their combat and, 
contemplating his broken standard, Ravana was consumed with 
rage. 
311 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 109 
The Duel continues 
Witnessing the combat between Rama and Ravana, all beings 
were struck with amazement and those two warriors, assuming 
a dreadful aspect in the struggle, highly enraged, determined on 
mutual slaughter and, in their excellent cars, bore down on each 
other. Thereupon their drivers, parading their skill as chariot eers, advanced, circled and manoeuvred in various ways. In 
their rapid course and swift evolutions, those two marvellous 
chariots ranged the battlefield, whilst the two warriors discharged 
countless shafts on each other, like unto clouds letting loose their 
showers. 
Having displayed their immeasurable resource in the use of 
weapons, those two champions halted face to face, chariot shaft 
to chariot shaft, their horses' heads touching, their standards 
intertwined. Then Rama loosed four sharp arrows, driving back 
Ravana's four spirited steeds and he, furious on beholding them 
retreat, let fly his penetrating shafts on Raghava. 
That hero, however, grievously wounded by the mighty 
Dashagriva, manifested neither agitation nor emotion and again 
the Ten-necked One discharged his shafts, that resounded like 
thunder, aiming at the charioteer of that God who bears the 
Thunderbolt ; and he struck Matali with his arrows with great 
force without being able to disturb him in any way or cause him 
to falter. Nevertheless Raghava, indignant at the affront 
offered to Matali more than if it had been directed at himself, 
with the aid of a succession of darts, decided to humble his 
adversary, and the valiant Raghava discharged twenty, thirty, 
sixty and thereafter hundreds and thousands of shafts on his 
rival's chariot. 
On his side, Ravana, the Lord of the Titans, standing in his 
car, enraged, overwhelmed Rama with an avalanche of maces 
and clubs and the struggle became more desperate causing die 
hair to stand on end. 
51a 
YUDDHA KANDA 
At the sound of the maces, clubs and axes and the loosing of 
plumed arrows, the seven seas were agitated and the tumult of 
the oceans sowed terror in the Danavas and Pannagas in their 
thousands, in the depths of hell. The earth shook with its 
mountains, forests and jungles ; the orb of day lost its brilliance 
and the wind ceased to blow. Devas, Gandharvas, Siddhas and 
Paramarishis were wrought up with anxiety as also the Kinneras 
and Great Serpents. 
" May good fortune attend the cows and brahmins ! May all 
the worlds endure forever ! May Raghava emerge triumphant 
in his combat with Ravana, the King of the Titans ! ** 
Offering up these prayers, the Devas accompanied by hosts of 
Rishis witnessed that duel between Rama and Ravana, a spec tacle that caused the hair to stand on end, and the hosts of the 
Gandharvas and Apsaras, watching that indescribable struggle, 
cried out : — " The sky resembles the sea and the sea the sky, but 
the fight between Rama and Ravana resembles nought but 
itself!" 
Thus did they speak on beholding the combat between Rama 
and Ravana. In his rage, the Long-armed Warrior, the increaser 
of the glory of the Raghus, Rama, placed an arrow, like unto a 
venomous reptile, on his bow and cut off one of Ravana's heads, 
whereupon that glorious head, adorned with sparkling earrings, 
rolled on the earth in the presence of the Three Worlds. Never theless another, equal to the former, grew immediately and Rama, 
with a steady hand, dexterously sundered the second head with 
his shafts. Hardly was it eliminated when another head 
appeared which was severed once more by Rama's darts like 
unto thunderbolts. Thereafter he struck off a hundred more, 
being unable to bring Ravana low, and that hero, conversant with 
every weapon, he the increaser of Kaushalya's delight, who had 
made use of innumerable missiles, reflected : — 
' These were the shafts by the help of which I slew Maricha, 
Khara, and Dushana as also Viradha in the Krauncha Wood and 
Kabandha in the Dandaka Forest ; these were the shafts where with I transfixed the Sala Trees and the mountains and Bali and 
with which I agitated the ocean ! All these weapons found their 
target, how is it that they have so little power over Ravana ? ' 
Absorbed though he was in his reflections, Raghava, without 
313 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
ceasing from action, let loose a shower of arrows on the breast of 
his adversary. On his side, Ravana, the Lord of the Titans, 
standing in his chariot, enraged, overwhelmed Rama with an 
avalanche of maces and clubs. Thus the fearful and desperate 
conflict, causing the hair to stand on end, continued in the air 
and on the ground and thereafter on the summit of the mountain. 
Devas, Danavas, Yakshas, Pisachas, Uragas and Rakshasas 
watched the dreadful combat that lasted seven days and neither 
by night nor day for a single hour did Rama and Ravana cease 
from fighting and the son of Dasaratha and the Indra of the 
Titans continued to struggle thus. Then the magnanimous 
charioteer of the King of the Gods, beholding no sign of Raghava 
gaining the victory, addressed him rapidly in the following 
words. 
CHAPTER I 10 
The Death of Ravana 
At that moment, Matali sought to recall Raghava's thoughts, 
saying : — " How is it that thou dost act in regard to Ravana as if 
thou wert unaware of thine own powers ? In order to bring 
about his end, discharge Brahma's Weapon upon him, O Lord 1 
Foretold by the Gods, the hour of his doom is at hand ! " 
Prompted by Matali, Rama took up a flaming shaft that was 
hissing like a viper, formerly bestowed on him by the magnani mous and powerful Sage Agastya. A gift of the Grandsire, that 
weapon never missed its target and it had been created of yore by 
Brahma for Indra and bestowed on the King of the Gods for the 
conquest of the Three Worlds. In its wings was the wind, in its 
point the fire and the sun, in its haft space, and, in size, it 
resembled the Mountains Meru and Mandara. With its 
marvellous point, haft and gilding, it was composed of the essence 
of all the elements and was as resplendent as the sun. Re sembling the Fire of Time enveloped in smoke, it was like unto 
an enormous snake and was capable of riving men, elephants, 
horses, gateways, bars and even rocks. Dreadful to behold, 
covered with blood from countless victims, coated with their 
flesh and of the temper of lightning, it emitted a thunderous 
3M 
YUDDHA KANDA 
sound. The disperser of hosts, it created universal alarm, and 
hissing like a great serpent, it was exceedingly formidable. In 
war, it was the provider of nourishment to herons, vultures, 
cranes and hordes of jackals ; it was a form of death itself, the 
sower of terror, the delight of the monkeys, the scourge of the 
titans and its wings were composed of innumerable brightly 
coloured plumes, like unto Garuda's. 
That marvellous and powerful shaft that was to destroy the 
titan was the object of terror to the worlds, the remover of the 
fear of the supporters of the Ikshvakus, the depriver of the glory 
of the foe, and it filled Rama with delight. Having charged it 
with the sacred formula, the valiant Rama of indescribable 
prowess placed that excellent weapon on his bow according to 
the method prescribed by the Veda and, when he made ready, all 
beings were seized with terror and the earth shook. Enraged, he 
stretched his bow with force and, deploying his whole strength, 
discharged that weapon, the destroyer of the vital parts, on 
Ravana, and that irresistible shaft like unto lightning, irrevocable 
as fate, loosed by the arm of one equal to the God who bears the 
Thunderbolt, struck Ravana's breast. Loosed with exceeding 
force, that missile, the supreme destroyer, pierced the breast of 
the wicked-hearted titan and, covered with blood, that fatal dart 
having extinguished his vital breaths, buried itself in the earth. 
Thereafter, having slain Ravana, that shaft, stained with blood 
which dripped therefrom, its purpose accomplished, returned 
submissively to the quiver. 
And Dashagriva, who had been struck down suddenly, let his 
bow and arrow fall from his hand as he yielded up his breath. 
Bereft of life, that Indra of the Nairritas of redoubtable valour 
and great renown, fell from his chariot as Vritra when struck by 
Indra's thunderbolt. 
Seeing him stretched on the ground, the rangers of the night 
who had escaped the carnage, struck with terror, their sovereign 
being slain, fled in all directions and, from every side, the monkeys 
who, in the presence of the dead Dashagriva had assumed a 
victorious air, hurled themselves upon them, armed with trees. 
Harassed by the monkey divisions, the titans, terror-stricken, 
took refuge in Lanka and, having lost their lord, in despair, gave 
way to tears. 
3*5 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
In the ranks of the monkeys, however, there arose cries of joy 
and shouts of triumph proclaiming Raghava's victory and 
Ravana's defeat, and the skies re-echoed to the music of the 
drums beaten by the Gods. A rain of flowers fell from heaven 
on to the earth, covering Raghava's chariot with a ravishing and 
marvellous shower of blossom. The cry of ' Well done ! Well 
done ! ' came from the firmament and the celestial voices of the 
magnanimous Gods were raised in Rama's praise. On the 
death of that source of terror to all the worlds a great joy rilled 
the Celestial Host as also the Charanas. 
The blessed Raghava, by slaying that Bull among the Titans, 
fulfilled the ambitions of Sugriva, Angada and Bibishana; 
peace reigned over all ; the cardinal points were stilled ; the 
air became pure, the earth ceased to tremble, the wind blew 
gently and the star of the day regained its full glory. 
At that instant, Sugriva, Bibishana and Angada, the foremost 
of his friends, and Lakshmana also, approached that happy 
conqueror and joyfully offered him due homage. Rama, the 
delight of the House of Raghu, surrounded by his adherents on 
the battlefield, having slain his adversary by his extraordinary 
power, resembled Mahendra amidst the Celestial Host. 
CHAPTER III 
The Lamentations of Bibishana 
Seeing his brother defeated, lying on the battlefield, Bibishana, 
his heart torn with violent grief, began to lament, saying : — 
" O Illustrious Warrior, thou who wert renowned for thy 
skill, experience and outstanding courage, even among the 
valiant, O Thou accustomed to a luxurious couch, how is it that 
thou art lying stiff and motionless, thy long arms adorned with 
bracelets, stretched on the ground, having suffered thy diadem, 
the lustre of which equals the sun, to fall on the earth ? O Hero 
that which I predicted has come to pass I Carried away by 
passion, in thy presumption, disregarding my counsel, this fate 
316 
YUDDHA KANDA 
has overtaken Prahasta, Indrajita, Kumbhakarna, Atiratha, 
Atikaya, Narantaka, and thee thyself. Alas ! The rampart of 
the virtuous has disappeared, the incarnation of duty has de parted} the refuge of the strong and powerful is no more. The 
sun has fallen to earth, the moon is obscured by darkness ; 
fire has lost its brilliance, energy is bereft offeree, since that hero, 
the prince of warriors, lies stretched on the earth. What 
remains now that he is deprived of his might and that tiger 
among the titans lies as if asleep in the dust ? That great tree, 
the Lord of the Titans, whose stability was the foliage, his 
valour the blossom, his asceticism the sap, his heroism the inter twining roots, has been overthrown on the battlefield by that 
tempest, Raghava. That elephant in mustha, Ravana, his 
strength the tusks, his lineage the backbone, his exuberance the 
trunk, his wrath the limbs, has been seized by the lion, Ikshvaku. 
That blazing fire, whose prowess and energy are spreading 
flames, his angry breathing the smoke, his martial ardour the 
heat, has been extinguished by that cloud, Rama. That bull 
among the titans with the Nairritas as his tail, hump and horns, 
his love of pleasure the eyes and ears, he the conquerer of his 
foes, equal to the wind in swiftness, that tiger of the lords of 
the earth is lying dead.*' 
Hearing these words, full of good sense and virtue, uttered by 
Bibishana who was torn with grief, Rama addressed him 
saying: — 
" Nay, this hero has not succumbed on account of his lack of 
prowess ! Endowed with burning courage in battle, having 
displayed the greatest energy, he fell without yielding. One 
should not mourn for those who, firm in their duty as warriors, 
for the sake of renown fall on the field of battle. It is not the 
time to weep for this brave warrior, the terror of the worlds and 
their leaders, now that he lies under the sway of death ; no one 
is always victorious in war ; sometimes the brave succumb to 
the blows of the enemy and at other times it is the foe who is 
overcome by them. This path followed by Ravana was taught 
to us by the Sages and the warrior class hold it in great honour. 
The warrior who is shun in battle, should not be mourned, this 
is the law. In this conviction, do thy duty without further 
anxiety and consider what action should now be taken." 
317 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Then Bibishana, who was overcome with grief, instantly 
replied to that noble prince who had spoken to him in his 
brother's interest and said : — 
" This valiant one who, in previous battles was never defeated 
even by the assembled Gods under Vasava's command, assailed 
by thee on the field, beheld bis power shattered as the ocean 
when coming in contact with its shores. The bestower of gins 
on those who desired them, he knew how to enjoy wealth and 
entertain those who served him. The distributor of treasure 
amongst his friends, he suffered his wrath to fall on his foes. 
Feeding the sacred fire, he practiced severe penances, was 
conversant with the Veda and fulfilled his duty as a real hero. 
Now, with thine approval, I desire to perform bis obsequies." 
Touched by these poignant words of Bibishana's, Rama 
commanded him to perform the funeral rites that lead the soul 
to heaven, and said : — 
" Death has terminated our emnity that now has no reason for 
its existence. He is as dear to me as thee ; let us therefore 
perform the obsequies ! " 
CHAPTER 112 
The Lamentations of Havana's Consorts 
Hearing that Ravana had fallen under the blows of the highly 
powerful Raghava, the female titans, like unto cows which have 
lost their calves, overcome with grief, their hair dishevelled, 
rushed out of the inner apartments and, though restrained, 
rolled in the dust again and again. Issuing from the northern 
gateway with their attendants, they entered that dreadful 
battlefield searching for their dead lord and cried out, * O Our 
King, Our Support *, running hither and thither on the ground 
that was covered with headless trunks, mud and gore. Their 
eyes full of tears, overcome with grief, they emitted cries like 
unto female elephants who have lost the leader of the herd. 
Then they beheld that great and exceedingly powerful and 
illustrious Ravana, their lord, lying in the dust and they immedi ately all fell upon his body like creepers that have been tors 
318 
YUDDHA KANDA 
down in the forest. In a transport of passion, one embraced 
him sobbing, one pressed his feet, one hung on his neck, whilst 
another, beating the air with her arms, rolled on the ground and 
yet another, gazing on her dead lord, swooned away, and one, 
laying her head in his lap, wept as she looked on him, her tears 
bathing his face, as rime covers a lotus flower. 
Beholding their lord lying stretched on the earth, in their 
despair, they emitted continual cries of pain as their lamentations 
increased — * He of whom Shakra himself stood in awe, he who 
was the source of terror to Yama, he, by whom the King 
Vaishravana was dispossessed of his Chariot Pushpaka, he, who 
caused the Gandharvas, Rishis, and the magnanimous Gods to 
tremble, is now lying dead on the field. He had nought to fear 
from Asuras, Suras or Pannagas, for it was in man that the peril 
lay for him ; he, who could not be slain by Devatas, Danavas 
or Rakshasas is lying here on the earth, struck down by a mere 
mortal fighting on foot ; he, who could not be slain by Suras, 
Yakshas or Asuras, received bis death blow from a man, as one 
who is defenceless.' 
Thus did the wretched consorts of Ravana speak amidst their 
sobs and, overwhelmed with grief, continued to lament without 
ceasing, saying : — 
" Not heeding the advice of thy friend, who ever offered thee 
prudent counsel, to our destruction thou didst bear Sita away 
and thus the titans have fallen and we shall perish this day on 
account of thy fault. Thy beloved brother, Bibishana, speaking 
to thee in reasonable terms was publicly affronted by thee in thy 
folly, driven on, as thou wert by destiny ; if thou hadst returned 
the Princess of Mithila to Rama, this fearful and appalling 
disaster, that is destroying us to the very root, would never have 
taken place. The wishes of thy brother, of Rama and of thine 
innumerable friends would have been fulfilled ; none of us 
would have been widowed nor the hopes of our enemies accom plished. But, in thy perversity, having retained Sita by force, 
the titans, we ourselves and thou thyself, are all victims of a triple 
destruction. Nevertheless, O Bull among the Titans, it is not 
thy passion that is the cause but destiny ; all that dies is slain by 
destiny. This destruction of the monkeys and the titans in 
combat and thine own, O Long-armed Warrior, is the work of 
319 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
destiny. Neither the considerations of wealth, desire, valour nor 
dominion can avert the course of destiny ! " 
Thus the wretched consorts of the King of the Titans lamen ted like ospreys, overwhelmed by grief, their eyes full of tears. 
CHAPTER 113 
The Lamentations of Mandodari : Havana's Funeral Rites 
While the consorts of Ravana were lamenting thus, the foremost 
amongst them steadily fixed on him a tender and sorrowful 
glance and, in the presence of her lord, Dasbagriva, who had 
been slain by Rama of inconceivable exploits, the unfortunate 
Mandodari expressed her grief in this wise : — 
" O Long-armed Warrior, younger brother of Vaishravana, 
did not Purandara himself fear to stand before thee in thy wrath 
and did not the great Rishis and the illustrious Gandharvas as also 
the Charanas, assailed by thee, flee to every quarter ? Now 
Rama, who is but a mortal, has defeated thee in combat, thou 
who didst surpass the Three Worlds in prowess ; thou whose 
strength rendered thee invincible, how is it that thou hast fallen 
under the blows of a mere man, a wanderer in the forest ? Thou , 
able to assume any form at will, living in a place inaccessible to 
man, how can thy defeat by Rama be explained ? 
" Nay, I do not believe that thou wast thus struck down in the 
forefront of the battle by Rama's action, thou who wert ever 
wont to be victorious in all circumstances. Rather, having 
recourse to inconceivable magic, was it destiny in the form of 
Rama in person or it may be that it was Vasava who slew thee, O 
Mighty Hero ! But would Vasava have ventured to stand face 
to face with thee on the battlefield in view of thy great prowess 
and strength, thou the foe of the Celestials ? Assuredly it was 
that great Yogi, the Supreme Soul, the Eternal Spirit Who was 
thy slayer. He who has no beginning, middle or end, the Most 
High, greater that Mahat,1 the Support of Nature, He Who 
carries the conch, the discus and the mace, Whose breast bears 
1 Mahat— Connie Intellect, 
3*0 
YUDDHA KANDA 
the Shrivatsa Mark, to Whom prosperity belongs, the invincible, 
indestructible, everlasting Vishnu, the true Hero assuming 
human form surrounded by all the Gods in monkey shapes, He, 
the Lord of the Worlds, has slain thee, thou, the enemy of the 
Gods, with thy kinsmen and the titans who attended on thee ! 
" Formerly, having subdued the senses, thou didst conquer 
the Three Worlds and thereafter thy senses conquered thee in 
their turn. Rama is no mere mortal ; once in Janasthana he 
slew thy brother Khara and the innumerable titans who followed 
him ; furthermore when Hanuman audaciously penetrated into 
the City of Lanka, inaccessible to the Gods themselves, we were 
sorely distressed. How oft did I address thee, saying, ' Have we 
nought to fear from Raghava ', but thou didst not heed me. 
These are the consequences ! Without cause thou didst cherish 
a passion for Sita, O King of the Titans, to the destruction of thy 
kingdom, life and race ! By offering insult to the illustrious 
Sita, who surpasses Arundhati and Rohini, thou didst commit an 
unpardonable offence ! She is more patient than the earth 
itself, the prosperity of prosperity itself, the beloved consort of 
Rama, of faultless limbs, who was the splendour of the lonely 
forest where she dwelt. By bearing that unfortunate one away, 
assuming a disguise and without being able to enjoy the antici pated delight of union with Maithili, thou hast brought about 
thine own destruction ! 
" O My Lord, the asceticism of that lady faithful to her 
husband, has consumed thee ! Since all the Gods and their 
leaders with Agni at their head feared thee, thou wast not 
instantly destroyed when thou didst lay brutal hands on that 
slender-waisted lady. But, 0 Lord, when the time is ripe, the 
one who acts wickedly reaps the fruit of his evil actions ; of that 
there is no doubt. He who behaves virtuously culls felicity and 
he who acts sinfully reaps ill-fortune. Bibishana has found 
happiness and thou in the same wise has met with disaster. Thou 
didst possess other women who surpassed Maithili in beauty 
but in thine infatuation thou didst not perceive it. None dies 
without a determining cause, for thee it was none other than Sita. 
Far didst thou go to seek that woman who was to be the reason 
of thy death ; now Maithili, released from all her sufferings, will 
rejoice with Rama. Trifling indeed is my merit, since I have 
3" 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
fallen into this ocean of grief, I who formerly sported on Mount 
Kailasha, Mandara and Meru and in the woods of Chaitaratha 
and all the gardens of the Gods with thee, being adorned with 
marvellous garlands and jewels, roaming at large in a chariot of 
incomparable magnificence, beholding innumerable countries, 
whilst now I am deprived of all pleasures and enjoyments by thy 
death, O Hero ! Here am I, transformed as it were into another ; 
condemned on account of the fluctuations of the fortunes of 
kings. O Prince, how gracious wert thou with thy charming 
eyebrows, brilliant complexion and arched nose ; thou whose 
beauty, splendour and radiance rivalled the moon, the lotus 
and the sun ; dazzling with innumerable diadems and varie gated garlands, thy red lips and brilliant earrings ; handsome 
and pleasing, whose glances, misty with wine, roved here and 
there in the banqueting hall, conversing with tender smiles ! 
Alas to-day thy countenance has lost its radiance, O King, 
mutilated as thou art by Rama's shafts, red with blood, covered 
with flesh and brains and soiled with the dust of chariots. Ah ! 
the final period of my life has come ; the sad state of widowhood ! 
Wretched being that I am, I never contemplated this ! ' My 
rather is the King of the Danavas, my consort the Lord of the 
Titans, my son the Conqueror of Shakra ! I have nought to fear 
with such protectors who crush the arrogance of their foes, who 
are terrible and renowned for their might and courage,' thus did 
I speak in my pride. With such a power as thou possessed, O 
Bull among Titans, how has so great a disaster overtaken thee 
suddenly, through a mere man ? Thou wert like a marvellous 
sapphire, enormous, like unto a mountain and dazzling with thy 
rings, bracelets, chains of emeralds and pearls and thy flowery 
garlands ; full of gaiety in pastimes and enjoyments. Thy 
body, that shone with the lustre of thine ornaments, as a cloud 
riven with lightning, is now pierced by many arrows, ill-fitted to 
be embraced, without a space that is not bristling with darts, like 
unto an hedgehog, the muscles torn with shafts loosed with 
violence on thy vital parts, a corpse, lying on the earth, that was 
formerly dark in hue and is now the colour of blood, O King ! 
Alas ! That which seemed a dream has now become a reality 1 
How was Rama able to strike thee down, thou who wert death to 
Death himself; whence comes it that thou hast fallen under his 
322 
YUDDHA KANDA 
sway, thou who enjoyed the wealth of the Three Worlds 
whom thou didst inspire with a lively fear ; thou who conquered 
the Guardians of the Worlds, who overcame Shankara with thy 
shafts, who didst humble the proud and manifest thy great 
prowess. Thou who didst trouble the universe, the scourge of the 
virtuous, whose strength inspired thee to utter insolent threats 
in the enemy's presence ; thou the support of thy family and 
thine attendants, the slayer of redoubtable warriors, thou who 
exterminated the leaders of the Danavas and Yakshas in their 
thousands, thou who triumphed in the fight over those wearing 
impenetrable armour, thou who many a time obstructed the 
sacrifices, thou the saviour of thy race, who set at nought the laws 
of duty, who took refuge in the power of magic in battle, who 
robbed the Gods, Asuras and men of their daughters from here 
and there and who didst plunge the wives of thy foes into 
mourning ; thou, the guide of thy people, who ruled over the 
Island of Lanka, thou the perpetrator of dreadful deeds, thou 
who didst prepare for us many a pleasure and enjoyment, thou 
the foremost of warriors ; beholding thee, O Lord, who despite 
thy great powers, hast been struck down by Rama, my heart 
must be hard indeed that I yet live bereft of thee, my Beloved. 
Having rested on sumptuous couches, O King of the Titans, how 
is it that thou art now sleeping on the earth, the dust thy 
coverlet ? 
" When mine illustrious son Indrajita was struck down by 
Lakshmana in the fight, I was deeply distressed but to-day I am 
undone, I, who, already bereft of parents and kinsfolk, now lose 
my last support in thee I Deprived of pleasure and enjoyments, 
now that thou hast left on the last journey from which none 
returns, O King, I shall waste away in thy perpetual remem brance. I cannot live without thee ; take me with thee ; why 
dost thou leave me in my misery ? Art thou vexed to see me 
unveiled who have crossed the city boundary to run here on foot, 
O Lord ? Look on thy cherished consorts who have discarded 
their veils ; seeing them all come forth from the city, art thou 
displeased ? This company, with whom thou didst disport 
thyself, is desolate, deprived of its leader and thou dost not 
comfort them. Hast thou no reverence for us ? Those women 
whom thou hast widowed, O King, and more than one was of 
3*3 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
noble lineage, who were devoted to their consorts, firm in their 
duty and submissive to their Gurus, in their grief have cursed 
thee and, on this account, thou hast fallen under the blows of 
thine adversary. Stricken by thee, they have cursed thee and this 
is the retribution ! O King, the truth of die saying, The tears 
of women devoted to their husbands do not tall on the earth in 
vain ', has been proven by thee ! How comes it, O King, that 
thou, who didst surpass all the worlds in valour, wert so base as 
to carry off this woman, having lured Rama from the hermitage 
with the aid of an illusory deer ? In the intoxication of thy 
strength thou didst bear away Rama's consort after separating 
her from Lakshmana, and yet, if I reflect carefully, thou wert 
never a faint-hearted warrior ! This is the manifest proof of the 
changeability of fortune. Conversant with the past and future 
and reflecting on the present, that long-armed warrior, my 
truthful brother-in-law,1 seeing Maithili, whom thou hadst 
borne away, sighing deeply, told me what had taken place. The 
destruction of the foremost of the titans has been brought about 
by this infatuation which was the source of thy lust and anger. 
Thou didst sacrifice thy real interests to this violent appetite that 
destroys everything to its very roots and, by this action, the whole 
titan race is deprived of its leader. 
" Nay, I should not weep for thee, though famed for thy 
strength and valour but my woman's nature inclines my heart to 
compassion. Bearing with thee the sum of that which thou hast 
done, be it good or ill, thou hast gone to the place for which thou 
wert destined ; it is for myself I should lament, I who am plunged 
in affliction by thy loss. 
" Thou didst not give ear to thy friends who desired thy 
welfare and, though exceedingly sagacious, thou didst ignore the 
counsels of thy brothers, O Ten-necked One. Bibishana's 
words so full of reason, that were measured, prudent, salutory 
and affectionate were not heeded by thee despite their signifi cance. Drunk with thine own power, the utterances of Marichi, 
Kumbhakarna and of thy sire also, were not acceptable to thee ; 
behold the consequences ! 
" O Thou who resemblest a dark cloud in hue, who art clothed 
in yellow, wearing dazzling bracelets, why are thy limbs stiff 
3*4 
YUDDHA KANDA 
and covered with blood ? Thou fcignest sleep ; why dost thou 
not answer me who am overcome with grief? Why dost thou 
not speak to me, the daughter of the supremely powerful 
Yatudhana Surnali, who never retreated in battle? Rise! 
Rise ! Why dost thou remain lying there in the face of this 
fresh insult ? To-day the rays of the sun fall on Lanka without 
fear. Thy mace, that brilliant weapon encircled with gold, like 
unto Surya, with which thou didst exterminate thy foes in 
battle, resembling the thunderbolt of Indra, which thou didst 
wield at thy whim to the destruction of the many on the battle field, now Lies shattered in a thousand pieces by Rama's arrows. 
Why dost thou lie embracing the earth like a loved one ? How 
is it that thou dost not address a word to me as if I were no 
longer thy beloved ? 
" Woe unto me, whose heart did not split into a thousand 
pieces, riven by grief, when thou didst return to the five 
elements!" 
Thus did Mandodari lament, her eyes full of tears ; and 
thereafter her heart overflowing with love, she swooned away, 
falling unconscious on Ravana's breast, like a flash of lightning 
striking a crimson cloud at dusk. Thereupon her companions, 
distressed, raised up her who was lamenting and placing her in 
their midst, said : — 
" O Queen, art thou not conversant with the uncertainty of 
fate in this world and how, in a moment, the fortune of kings may 
change?" 
To these words, Mandodari replied with sobs and cries, her 
pure and lovely face and her breast bathed in tears. 
Then Rama said to Bibishana : — 
" Proceed with the obsequies of thy brother and offer conso lation to his wives ! *' 
Thereafter the sagacious Bibishana, having reflected within 
himself, made this answer that was discreet, reasoned and in 
conformity with duty and understanding, saying : — 
" I cannot perform the funeral rites for one who failed to 
fulfil his responsibilities and his vows, who was cruel, ruthless 
and disloyal ; a ravisher of others wives 1 Under the guise of a 
brother he was mine enemy and took pleasure in inflicting injury ; 
Ravana does not merit this homage ! The world may say of me 
v 325 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
* he was a barbarian ', but when they learn of Ravana's wicked 
deeds, everyone will approve my conduct." 
Thus did he speak, and Rama, full of joy, the foremost of 
those who are firm in their duty, answered Bibishana, who was 
skilled in speech, saying : — 
" I seek thy welfare, since with thine aid I have been victorious, 
nevertheless it is essential that I should utter what is fitting, O 
Chief of the Titans ! Though unjust and wicked, this night ranger was ever energetic, valiant and courageous in war. It is 
said that the Gods with Shatakratu at their head were not able 
to overcome him. He was magnanimous and powerful, this 
oppressor of the worlds. Death brings enmity to an end ; we 
have accomplished our purpose, let us perform the obsequies ; 
it is meet for me, as well as for thee, to do so. In accord with 
tradition, this ceremony should take place in thy presence. 
Perform this pious act speedily, thou wilt receive much glory 
therefrom." 
At these words of Raghava, Bibishana hastened to carry out 
the funeral rites. 
Entering the City of Lanka, that Indra among the Titans, 
Bibishana, began to prepare for the Agnihotra Ceremony in 
honour of his brother. Carts, wood of varying essences, fire, 
utensils, sandal, logs of every kind, fragrant gums, perfumes, 
cloths, jewels, pearls and coral were all assembled by him and he 
soon returned surrounded by titans, whereupon, accompanied 
by Malyavan,1 he initiated the sacrifice. 
Having placed Ravana, the supreme Lord of the Titans, 
wrapped in linen cloths on a golden bier, the Twice-born with 
Bibishana at their head, their eyes suffused with tears, raised the 
Utter decorated with many fragrant and divine symbols to the 
sound of innumerable musical instruments and funeral chants, 
and all, turning their faces towards the south, took up pieces of 
wood which had been distributed among them. 
Then the brahmins, versed in the Yajur Veda, bearing naming 
brands went forward and those who had taken refuge with them, 
and the women of the inner apartments followed sobbing with 
tottering steps, running hither and thither. And Ravana was 
placed in a spacious ground, amidst profound lamentation, and a 
* Malyavan — The brother of Stiraali. 
3»« 
YUDDHA KANDA 
great pyre was built with pieces of Sandal and Padmaka Wood 
and grass, according to tradition ; and he was covered with 
antelope skins. 
Thereafter, in honour of the King of the Titans, a rare offering 
was made to the ancestors and the altar was installed to the 
south-west with the sacred fire in its proper place. Then curd 
and clarified butter were poured on Havana's shoulder and a 
wooden mortar placed at his feet with one between his thighs ; 
vessels of wood and the lower and upper kindling sticks, with a 
spare pestle, were set there according to the prescribed rules. 
Now the titans sacrificed a goat in honour of their king, according 
to tradition, as taught by the great Risbis, and, having dipped a 
cloth in butter, they covered the face of their sovereign, who was 
adorned with garlands and sprinkled with perfumes. Thereafter 
Bibishana's companions, their faces bathed in tears, covered the 
body with cloths and every kind of roasted grain, whereupon 
Bibishana kindled the pyre according to the sacred rites and, 
having laved him with a doth which had been previously 
wetted with water and mingled with linseed and sacrificial grass, 
he bowed down to him ; then he addressed the consorts of 
Ravana again and again in order to console them, finally en treating them to return home. And when they had all re entered the City of Lanka, that Indra among the Titans took 
up bis place by Rama in an attitude of reverence. 
Rama, however, with his army, Sugriva and Lakshmana, 
rejoiced at the death of his enemy, as the God who bears the 
Thunderbolt on the destruction of Vritra. 
Having laid aside the arrows and bow that Mahendra had 
bestowed upon him as also the massive armour, Rama, the slayer 
of his foes, renounced his wrath, his adversary having been 
subdued, and once more assumed a gentle mien. 
3»7 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
CHAPTER 1X4 
Bibishana is installed as King of Lanka 
Having witnessed the death of Ravana, the Devas, Gandharvas 
and Danavas mounted their respective chariots, discoursing on 
these matters. Conversing of Ravana's fearful end, the heroism 
of Raghava, the courageous fighting of the monkeys, the great 
valour of Maruti and Lakshmana and Sita's fidelity to her lord, 
those blessed ones returned joyfully from whence they had come. 
Raghava, however, sent back the celestial chariot blazing like 
a name that Indra had lent him and took leave of Matali after 
offering his thanks to him. Then Shakra's charioteer, dismissed 
by the mighty Rama, mounting his celestial car, ascended into 
the sky. 
Matali having returned to heaven in his chariot, Raghava, the 
foremost of car-warriors, in the height of felicity, embraced 
Sugriva and, having done so, accepted Lakshmana's homage and 
returned to the camp amidst the acclamations of the monkey ranks. 
Thereafter Kakutstha addressed the son of Sumitra, the 
devoted Lakshmana, the bearer of auspicious marks, who stood 
near him and said : — 
" O Friend, install Bibishana as King of Lanka ! On account 
of his loyalty, his zeal and the service he formerly rendered to us, 
my greatest desire is to see Bibishana, the younger brother of 
Ravana enthroned in Lanka, O Dear One." 
At these words from the magnanimous Raghava, Saumitri, 
full of joy, said : — " So be it ! " and speedily took up a golden 
jar which he placed in the hands of the foremost of monkeys. 
Thereafter that warrior commanded water to be drawn from the 
four seas and the monkeys went there in all haste and, having 
drawn water from the oceans, returned as swiftly as thought. 
Then Saumitri, at Rama's command, lifting up an excellent 
jar, caused Bibishana to take his place on a high seat and, 
following the injunctions laid down in the sacred texts, sur rounded by a crowd of his friends, with that water installed him 
as King of Lanka amidst the titans. 
3*8 
YUDDHA KANDA 
All the monkeys as well as the titans assisted at Bibishana's 
installation and, amidst unequalled transports of delight, they 
paid tribute to Rama. Bibishana's counsellors were exceedingly 
happy, as also the titans who were devoted to him and, being 
enthroned as King of Lanka, he, Raghava and Lakshmana, who 
accompanied him, experienced supreme satisfaction. Then the 
new monarch, having spoken graciously to his subjects, went to 
where Rama was to be found. 
Thereafter the people of the city offered him curds, parched 
rice, sweetmeats, roasted grain and flowers, which he placed at 
the disposal of Rama and Lakshmana, and Raghava, seeing 
Bibishana's work accomplished and his purpose attained, 
accepted all in deference to him. 
Then Rama addressed the valiant Hanuman, who resembled a 
mountain, as he stood before him with bowed head and joined 
palms, saying : — 
" With the approval of the great King Bibishana, O My 
Friend, do thou re-enter Lanka and enquire for Maithili. Say 
to Vaidehi that I am well, as also Sugriva and Lakshmana. 0 
Most Eloquent of Speakers, tell her of the death of Ravana on 
the field of battle. Impart these agreeable tidings to Vaidehi, O 
Prince of the Monkeys, and having received her commands, 
return ! " 
CHAPTER ZI5 
Hanuman carries Rama's Message to Sita 
Thus commanded, Hanuman, born of Maruta, returned to 
Lanka overwhelmed with honours by the rangers of the night and, 
entering the city invested with Bibishana's authority which he had 
sought, Hanuman penetrated to the Ashoka Grove, knowing that 
Sita was to be found there. 
There he beheld Maithili like an anguished Rohini, uncared 
for, sitting sorrowfully at the foot of a tree surrounded by female 
titans and, approaching her humbly and gently, Hanuman 
inclined his head in obeisance to her. 
329 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
At the appearance of the mighty Hanuman, that Goddess 
remained silent, but thereafter, having recognized him, she was 
delighted, and marking her tranquil looks, Hanuman the fore most of monkeys, prepared to relate all that Rama had said : — 
" O Vaidehi, Rama is well as also Sugriva and Lakshmana ; 
he enquires as to thy welfare ! His purpose is accomplished, he, 
the conquerer of his foes has slain his adversary. Assisted by 
Bibishana and the monkeys, Rama, with the skill and wisdom of 
Lakshmana, has slain Ravana despite his prowess, O Goddess ! 
These are pleasant tidings but I will delight thee still further, O 
Divinity. In this war, undertaken on thine account, O Virtuous 
Sita, Rama has achieved a great triumph ! Take heart therefore, 
have no further anxiety ; Ravana is dead and Lanka subdued. 
Banishing sleep, I resolved to deliver thee and bridging the sea 
fulfilled my vow. Do not fear now to be in Ravana's abode since 
Bibishana has become the Lord of Lanka. Because of this, take 
courage, thou canst dwell peacefully in the palace; Rama 
himself is coming hither with a joyful step eager to see thee." 
At these tidings, the divine Sita, her face radiant as the moon 
on account of joy, was unable to utter a single word and that 
prince of monkeys enquired of Sita, who remained silent, saying:— 
" Of what art thou thinking, O Goddess, since thou dost not 
answer me ? " 
Thus interrogated by Hanuman, Sita, fixed in the path of 
duty, in the height of joy, said in a voice broken with sobs : — 
" Hearing these pleasant tidings of the triumph of my lord, 
for a moment joy rendered me speechless. Nay, assuredly, 
reflecting on it, O Flavamgama, I do not know what gift I can 
offer thee which would be equal to this ! I know nothing on 
earth comparable to these happy tidings or with what I can 
recompense thee fittingly. Gold, precious gems of every kind, 
even a throne or any object in the Three Worlds cannot be 
measured against thy message ! " 
At these words of Vaidehi, the monkey, standing before her 
with joined palms, joyfully replied : — 
" O Thou who art ever engaged in what is pleasant and 
advantageous to thy Lord and who desirest him to be victorious, 
thine affectionate speech confers honour on thee, O Irreproach able Lady." 
33° 
YUDDHA KANDA 
Hearing this, Maithili, the daughter of Janaka addressed 
these flattering words to the Son of the Wind : — 
" Thy speech which is characteristic, urbane and dictated by 
the eight-fold intelligence is worthy of thee. Thou, the exceed ingly virtuous son of Anils art deserving of praise ! Assuredly 
strength, prowess, knowledge of the scriptures, courage* 
boldness, superior skill, energy, endurance, steadiness, con stancy and humility, these brilliant qualities and many others 
arc all to be found in thee ! " 
Unmoved by this praise, Hamiman, standing before her with 
joined palms, addressed Sita respectfully and said : — 
" With thy consent I will slay all those female titans who 
formerly taunted thee in thy misfortune, O Thou whose lord is 
a god. I know that those monsters of hideous shape and con duct, those cruel beings of savage looks, those grim-visaged 
titans, more than once addressed thee in threatening tones at 
Havana's command. Grant me permission to strike down those 
barbarians of distorted features and fearful aspect. I shall beat 
them with my fists, heels, long arms, thighs and knees ; I shall 
tear them to pieces with my teeth, chew up their ears, pull out 
their hair, knock them down and destroy them, since they have 
caused thee pain, O Illustrious Princess ! I shall exterminate 
those monsters who formerly insulted thee." 
Hearing Hanuman's words, the unfortunate Sita, friend of the 
distressed, reflecting carefully, said to him : — 
" Who would be angry with women, who are dependent on a 
monarch who is their supporter, and who act on other's advice 
as mere servants or slaves, O Excellent Monkey ? All that has 
happened to me is on account of an evil fate and the consequence 
of some fault committed formerly. One reaps the fruit of one's 
actions. Do not speak thus, O Long-armed Warrior, the path 
of destiny is inexorable ! It was inevitable that these circum stances should overtake me and, in this conviction, I wish in 
compassion to protect the slaves of Havana. It was under the 
orders of that titan that these women ill-treated me. He being 
slain, they will no longer oppress me, O Son of Maruta. There 
is an ancient saying full of wisdom which a bear uttered formerly 
in the presence of a tiger, hear it, O Plavamgama ! 
" 'A superior being does not render evil for evil, this is a 
331 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
maxim one should observe ; the ornament of virtuous persons is 
their conduct. One should never harm the wicked or the good 
or even cruninals meriting death. A noble soul will ever exercise 
compassion even towards those who enjoy injuring others or 
those of cruel deeds when they are actually committing them, 
who is without fault ? ' " 
Hearing these words, Hanuman, who was skilled in speech, 
said to Sita, the irreproachable consort of Rama : — 
" Thou art worthy of Raghava, thou, bis chaste wife crowned 
with many virtues. O Goddess, command me to seek out 
Rama!" 
On this, Vaidehi born of Janaka, said : — 
" I desire to see my lord, the friend of his devotees ! " 
Hearing her speak thus, Hanuman, the exceedingly intelligent 
son of Maruta made this reply to Maithili, causing that princess 
great delight 
" This day shalt thou see Rama, whose countenance resembles 
the full moon, with Lakshmana and his trusted friends, his 
enemies slain, as Sachi looks upon Indra, the King of the Gods." 
Having spoken thus to Sita, who was as radiant as Shri 
herself, the exceedingly valiant Hanuman immediately departed 
to rejoin Raghava. Without delay, the foremost of monkeys, 
Hanuman, repeated the words that the daughter of Janaka had 
uttered, in their proper sequence to Rama who was the equal of 
the Chief of the Gods. 
CHAPTER I I 6 
Rama sends for Sita 
That highly intelligent monkey, having paid obeisance to Rama, 
whose eyes resembled the petals of a lotus, the most skilled of 
archers, said to him : — 
" It behoveth thee to visit Maithili who is consumed with 
grief and on account of whom this enterprise, that has been 
crowned with success, was undertaken. In the distress that 
overwhelms her, Maithili, her eyes bathed in tears, hearing of 
332 
YUDDHA KANDA 
thy victory, expressed a desire to behold thee once more. 
Confiding in me formerly, her glances warm with emotion, she 
repeated * I desire to see my lord again ! * " 
These words of Hanuman instantly evoked thoughts in Rama, 
the first of men, causing him to shed tears. Sighing deeply, he 
said to Bibishana standing near, who resembled a cloud : — 
" Bring the Princess of Videha, Sita, hither, anointed with 
celestial unguents, adorned with heavenly jewels, having laved 
her head ; do not delay ! " 
At these words of Rama, Bibishana hastened to the private 
apartments to fetch Sita with her attendants. Beholding the 
unfortunate Maithili, Bibishana, the powerful King of the Titans, 
paid obeisance to her, raising his joined palms to his forehead, 
and respectfully addressed her, saying : — 
" O Vaidehi, sprinkle thyself with celestial unguents, adorn 
thyself with divine ornaments and ascend this palanquin ! May 
happiness attend thee ! Thy lord desires to see thee ! *' 
Then Vaidehi answered Bibishana who had addressed her 
thus, saying : — " Without having bathed, I wish to see my 
consort, O Bibishana." 
Hearing this, Bibishana replied : — " It behoveth thee to do 
what Rama commands ! " Whereto the virtuous Maithili, who 
regarded her husband as a god, filled with conjugal duty, said : — 
* Be it so ! ' 
Thereupon Sita, her tresses waved, adorned with priceless 
ornaments, wearing gorgeous raiment, ascended a palanquin 
borne by those titans accustomed to do so, accompanied by a 
large escort under Bibishana's command. 
And Bibishana approaching that magnanimous hero, who was 
merged in meditation, bowing down to him, joyfully announced 
Sita's arrival. 
Hearing that his consort, who had dwelt long in the titan's 
abode, had come, rage, joy and grief overwhelmed Raghava, the 
slayer of his toes and, beholding Sita in the palanquin, Rama, in 
order to test her, dissembling his happiness, said to Bibishana : — 
" O Supreme Lord of the Titans, O My Friend who ever 
rejoiced in my victories, bring Vaidehi nearer to me." 
At Raghava's command, the righteous Bibishana caused the 
crowd to disperse, whereupon titans clad in armour, wearing 
333 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
turbans, with drums and bamboo staves in their hands began to 
move about driving away the warriors, bears, monkeys and 
titans, who, scattering, stood apart some way off. And as they 
were being driven away, a tremendous clamour arose resembling 
the roar of the sea buffeted by the winds. 
Seeing them dispersing, whilst confusion was created amongst 
them, Rama in affection for them, grew indignant at their 
departure and, highly incensed, with a glance that seemed as if 
it would consume him, addressed the exceedingly intelligent 
Bibisbana in terms of reproach, saying : — 
" Why, disregarding me, dost thou harass them, are they not 
my people ? Her conduct, not raiment, walls, seclusion or other 
royal prohibitions, are a woman's shield. In times of calamity, 
peril, war, the Swyamvara or the nuptual ceremony, it is not 
forbidden to behold a woman unveiled. It is not prohibited to 
look upon a woman who has fallen into distress and difficulty, 
above all in my presence. Therefore, leaving the palanquin, let 
Vaidehi come hither on foot so that the dwellers in the woods 
may see her at my side." 
Hearing Rama's words, Bibishana became thoughtful and 
conducted Ska to him reverently, whilst Lakshmana, Sugriva and 
also Hanuman, hearing Rama speak thus, were saddened. 
Then Maithili, confused and shrinking within herself, 
approached her lord accompanied by Bibishana ; and it was with 
astonishment, delight and love that Sita, whose husband was a 
god, gazed on Rama's gracious appearance, she whose own face 
was still beautiful. Beholding the countenance of her dearly 
loved lord, whom she had not seen for so long and which was as 
radiant as the full moon when it rises, she cast aside all anxiety 
and her own face became as fair as the immaculate orb of the 
night. 
chapter 1x7 
Rama repudiates Sita 
Beholding Maithili standing humbly beside him, Rama gave 
expression to the feelings he had concealed in his heart, saying : — 
" O Illustrious Princess, I have re-won thee and mine enemy 
334 
YUDDHA KANDA 
has been defeated on the battlefield ; I have accomplished all 
that fortitude could do ; my wrath is appeased ; the insult and 
the one who offered it have both been obliterated by me. To-day 
my prowess has been manifested, to-day mine exertions have 
been crowned with success, to-day I have fulfilled my vow and 
am free. As ordained by destiny the stain of thy separation and 
thine abduction by that fickle-minded titan has been expunged 
by me, a mortal. Of what use is great strength to the vacillating, 
who do not with resolution avenge the insult offered to them ? 
" To-day Hanuman is plucking the fruit of his glorious 
exploits, and Sugriva, who is valiant in war and wise in counsel, 
with his army is reaping the harvest of his exertions ! Bibishana 
too is culling the fruits of his labours, he who cast off a brother, 
who was devoid of virtue, to come to me." 
When Sita heard Rama speak in this wise, her large doe-like 
eyes filled with tears and, beholding the beloved of his heart 
standing close to him, Rama, who was apprehensive of public 
rumour, was torn within himself. Then, in the presence of the 
monkeys and the titans, he said to Sita, whose eyes were as large 
as lotus petals, her dark hair plaited, and who was endowed with 
faultless limbs : — 
" What a man should do in order to wipe out an insult, I have 
done by slaying Havana for I guard mine honour jealously ! 
Thou wen re-won as the southern region, inaccessible to man, 
was re-gained by the pure-souled Agastya through his austerities. 
Be happy and let it be known that this arduous campaign, so 
gloriously terminated through the support of my friends, was 
not undertaken wholly for thy sake. I was careful to wipe out 
the affront paid to me completely and to avenge the insult 
offered to mine illustrious House. 
"A suspicion has arisen, however, with regard to thy conduct, 
and thy presence is as painful to me as a lamp to one whose eye is 
diseased ! Henceforth go where it best pleaseth thee, I give 
thee leave, O Daughter of Janaka. O Lovely One, the ten 
regions are at thy disposal ; I can have nothing more to do with 
thee ! What man of honour would give rein to his passion so far 
as to permit himself to take back a woman who has dwelt in the 
house of another ? Thou hast been taken into Ravana's lap and 
he has cast lustful glances on thee; how can I reclaim thee, I who 
335 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
boast of belonging to an illustrious House ? The end which I 
sought in re-conquering thee has been gained ; I no longer have 
any attachment for thee ; go where thou desirest ! This is the 
outcome of my reflections, O Lovely One ! Turn to Lakshmana 
or Bharata, Shatrughna, Sugriva or the Titan Bibishana, make 
thy choice, O Sita, as pleases thee best. Assuredly Ravana, 
beholding thy ravishing and celestial beauty, will not have 
respected thy person during the time that thou didst dwell in 
his abode." 
On this, that noble lady, worthy of being addressed in sweet 
words, hearing that harsh speech from her beloved lord, who for 
long had surrounded her with every homage, wept bitterly, and 
she resembled a creeper that has been torn away by the trunk of 
a great elephant. 
CHAPTER i i 8 
Sita's Lamentations; She undergoes the Ordeal by Fire 
Hearing these harsh words from the wrathful Raghava, causing 
her to tremble, those fearful utterances, which till that time had 
never been heard by her and were now addressed to her by her 
lord in the presence of a great multitude, Maithili, the daughter 
of Janaka, overwhelmed with shame, pierced to the heart by that 
arrow-like speech, shed abundant tears. Thereafter, wiping her 
face, she addressed her husband in gentle and faltering accents, 
saying: — 
" Why dost thou address such words to me, O Hero, as a 
common man addresses an ordinary woman ? I swear to thee, O 
Long-armed Warrior, that my conduct is worthy of thy respect ! 
It is the behaviour of other women that has rilled thee with 
distrust ! Relinquish thy doubts since I am known to thee ! If 
my limbs came in contact with another's, it was against my will, 
O Lord, and not through any inclination on my part ; it was 
brought about by fate. That which is under my control, my 
heart, has ever remained faithful to thee ; my body was at the 
mercy of another ; not being mistress of the situation, what could 
33< 
YUDDHA KANDA 
I do ? If despite the proofs of love that I gave thee whilst I lived 
with thee, I am still a stranger to thee, O Proud Prince, my loss is 
irrevocable 1 
"When, in Lanka, thou didst dispatch the great warrior 
Hanuman to seek me out, why didst thou not repudiate me then ? 
As soon as 2 had received the tidings that I had been abandoned 
by thee, I should have yielded up my life in the presence of that 
monkey, O Hero ! Then thou wouldst have been spared useless 
fatigue on mine account and others lives would not have been 
sacrificed, nor thine innumerable friends exhausted to no purpose. 
But thou, O Lion among Men, by giving way to wrath and by 
thus passing premature judgement on a woman, hast acted like 
a worthless man. 
" I have received my name from Janaka, but my birth was from 
the earth and thou hast failed to appreciate fully the nobility of 
my conduct, O Thou who are well acquainted with the nature of 
others. Thou hast had no reverence for the joining of our hands 
in my girlhood and mine affectionate nature, all these things hast 
thou cast behind thee ! " 
Having spoken thus to Rama, weeping the while, her voice 
strangled with sobs, Sita addressed the unfortunate Lakshmana, 
who was overwhelmed with grief, saying : — 
" Raise a pyre for me, O Saumitri, this is the only remedy for 
my misery ! These unjust reproaches have destroyed me, I 
cannot go on living ! Publicly renounced by mine husband, who 
is insensible to my virtue, there is only one redress for me, to 
undergo the ordeal by fire ! " 
Hearing Vaidehi's words, Lakshmana, the slayer of hostile 
warriors, a prey to indignation, consulted Raghava with his 
glance and by Rama's gestures he understood what was in his 
heart, whereupon the valiant Saumitri, following his indications, 
prepared the pyre. 
None amongst his friends dared to appeal to Rama, who 
resembled Death himself, the Destroyer of Time ; none dared 
to speak or even to look upon him. 
Thereafter Vaidehi, having circumambulated Rama, who 
stood with his head bowed, approached the blazing fire and, 
paying obeisance to the Celestials and brahmins, Maithili, with 
joined palms, standing before the flames, spoke thus : — 
337 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
"As my heart has never ceased to be true to Raghava, do thou, 
O Witness of all Beings, grant me thy protection ! As I am pure 
in conduct, though Rama looks on me as sullied, do thou, O 
Witness of the Worlds, grant me full protection ! " 
With these words, Vaidehi circumambulated the pyre and 
with a fearless heart entered the flames. 
And a great multitude were assembled there, amongst which 
were many children and aged people who witnessed Maithili 
entering the fixe. And, resembling gold that has been melted in 
the crucible, she threw herself into the blazing flames in the 
presence of all. That large-eyed lady, entering the fire, who is 
the Bearer of Sacrificial Offerings, appeared to those who watched 
her to resemble a golden altar. That fortunate princess 
entering the fire, which is nourished by oblations, seemed, in the 
eyes of the Rishis, Devas and Gandharvas, to resemble a 
sacrificial offering. 
Then all the women cried out : — 'Alas ! ' on seeing her, like 
a stream of butter hallowed by the recitation of mantras, fall 
into the flames, and she appeared to the Three Worlds, the Gods, 
the Gandharvas and the Danavas like a goddess smitten by a 
curse and cast down from heaven into hell. Then, as she 
entered the flames, a great and terrible cry rose from the titans 
and the monkeys. 
chapter 119 
Brahma's Praise of Rama 
Meanwhile the righteous Rama, hearing the lamentation of the 
masses, afflicted, pondered awhile and his eyes filled with tears. 
Then the King Vaishravana and Yama with the Pitris, the 
Thousand-eyed Lord of the Celestials, Varuna, Lord of the 
Waters and Mahadeva the blessed Three-eyed God who rides 
the Bull, as also Brahma the Creator of the World, King of the 
Learned, all gathered together, having hastened there in their 
chariots as bright as the sun, coming to the City of Lanka to seek 
out Rama. 
338 
YUDDHA KANDA 
Lifting up their great arms and hands adorned with jewels, 
they made obeisance with joined palms and the King of the Gods 
addressing Raghava, said : — 
" O Creator of the Universe and foremost of those versed in 
the spiritual science, how canst thou manifest indifference to 
Sita falling into the flames ? How art thou unaware that thou 
thyself art the Chief of the Gods ? Formerly thou wert the 
Vasu Ritadhaman, the Progenitor of the Vasus ! Thou art the 
Creator of the Three Worlds, Swyamprabhu, the eighth Rudra 
and the fifth of the Sadhyas. The Twin Ashwins are thy two 
ears, the sun and moon thine eyes ; these are the forms at the 
beginning, middle and end of creation in which thou dost 
appear, O Scourge of Thy Foes ; and yet thou dost distrust 
Vaidehi as if thou wert an ordinary man ! " 
Thus addressed by the Protector of the Worlds, the Leader of 
the Gods, Raghava, Lord of Peoples, Foremost of the Pious, 
answered : — 
" I deem myself to be a man, Rama, born of Dasaratha ; 
who then am I in reality ? From whence have I come ? Let 
the Grandsire of the World inform me ! " 
Thus spoke Kakutstha and Brahma, foremost of those who 
know the truth, addressed him saying : — 
" Thou art the great and effulgent God Narayana, the 
fortunate Lord armed with the discus. Thou art the One Tusked Boar, the Conqueror of thy Foes in the past and the 
future. Thou art the imperishable Brahman, Existence Itself, 
transcending the three divisions of time ; Thou art the Law of 
Righteousness, the Four-armed, the Bearer of the Sharnga Bow ; 
Thou art the Subduer of the senses, the Supreme Purusha ; 
Thou art invincible, Thou art the Holder of the Dagger, Thou 
art Vishnu, Thou art Krishna and of immeasurable might ; 
Thou art Senani and Gramani, the Controller of passions, the 
Origin and Dissolution ; Thou art Upendra and the Slayer of 
the Demon Madhu, Thou art the Creator of Indra and Indra 
Himself; Thou art the Lotus-navelled One; Thou dost bring 
combat to an end. The great and divine Rishis acknowledge 
Thee as their refuge and protector. Thou art the Himalayas of 
a hundred peaks, the Essence of the Vedas, the God of a Hundred 
Tongues, the Great Bull, Thou thyself art the Creator of the 
339 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
World, Swyamprabhu ; Thou art the Refuge and Elder of the 
Siddhas and Sadhyas ; Thou art the Sacrifice, the sacred 
syllable ' Vashat ' and 'Aum ', the greatest of the great. None 
knows thine origin or end or who Thou really art. Thou art 
manifest in all beings, in the cows and the brahmins ; Thou 
pervadest all regions, the firmament, the mountains and the 
rivers, Thou, the Thousand-footed God, the Thousand-headed 
One, Thou of a Thousand Eyes ! Thou art the support of all 
beings and the earth. When the earth is withdrawn, under the 
form of a great serpent, Thou dost appear on the waters support ing all the worlds and the Gods, Gandharvas and Danavas, O 
Rama. I am thy heart and the Goddess Saraswati, thy tongue ; 
the Gods are the hairs of Thy body, I, Brahma created them 
thus. When Thou dost close thine eyes, it is night and when 
Thou dost open them, it is day. The Vedas are Thy Samskaras1; 
nothing exists apart from thee ; the whole universe is Thy 
body, the earth Thy forbearance ; Agni Thy wrath, Soma Thy 
beneficence, the Shrivatsa Mark, Thy holy symbol. 
" Thou didst cover the Three Worlds in three strides ; Thou 
didst bind the terrible Bali and establish Mahendra as King. 
Sita is Lakshmi and Thou, the God Vishnu, Krishna and 
Prajapari. It was in order to slay Ravana that Thou didst enter 
a human body. This task that we entrusted to Thee has been 
accomplished, O Thou, the foremost of those who observe their 
duty. Ravana having fallen, do Thou ascend to heaven joyfully ! 
Thy might is irresistible, O Rama, and thine exploits are never 
fruitless. To behold Thee and offer adoration to Thee is never 
unprofitable ! It is not in vain that men are devoted to Thee on 
earth. Those who are ever faithful to Thee, attain to Thee who 
art the primeval Purusha and their desires will be fulfilled in this 
world and the other worlds. Those who recite this eternal, 
ancient and traditional theme, transmitted by the Rishis, will 
never suffer defeat." 
1 Samakaraa — Latent Impressions. 
340 
YUDDHA KANDA 
CHAPTER 120 
Sita ts restored to Rama 
Hearing those excellent words uttered by the Grandsire, 
Vibhabasu, who bore Vaidehi in his lap, having extinguished the 
pyre, rose up, and that Bearer of Sacrificial Offerings, assuming 
a corporeal form, stood up and took hold of the daughter of 
Janaka. Then that youthful woman, beautiful as the dawn, 
wearing ornaments of refined gold, attired in a red robe, having 
dark and curly hair, wearing fresh garlands, the irreproachable 
Vaidehi was restored to Rama by the God of Fire. 
Thereafter the Witness of the whole world, Pavaka, addressed 
Rama, saying : — 
" Here is Vaidehi, O Rama, there is no sin in her ! Neither by 
word, feeling or glance has thy lovely consort shown herself to be 
unworthy of thy noble qualities. Separated from thee, that 
unfortunate one was borne away against her will in the lonely 
forest by Ravana, who had grown proud on account of his power. 
Though imprisoned and closely guarded by titan women in the 
inner apartments, thou wast ever the focus of her thoughts and 
her supreme hope. Surrounded by hideous and sinister women, 
though tempted and threatened, Maithili never gave place in her 
heart to a single thought for that titan and was solely absorbed in 
thee. She is pure and without taint, do thou receive Maithili ; 
it is my command that she should not suffer reproach in any 
way." 
These words filled Rama's heart with delight and he, the most 
eloquent of men, that loyal soul, reflected an instant within 
himself, his glance full of joy. Then the illustrious, steadfast 
and exceedingly valiant Rama, the first of virtuous men, hearing 
those words addressed to him, said to the Chief of the Gods : — 
" On account of the people, it was imperative that Sita should 
pass through this trial by fire ; this lovely woman had dwelt in 
Ravana's inner apartments for a long time. Had I not put the 
innocence of Janaki to the test, the people would have said : — 
* Rama, the son of Dasaratha is governed by lust 1 ' It was well 
z 34* 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
known to me that Sita had never given her heart to another and 
that the daughter of Janaka, Maithili, was ever devoted to me. 
Ravana was no more able to influence that large-eyed lady, whose 
chastity was her own protection than the ocean may pass beyond 
its bournes. Despite his great perversity, he was unable to 
approach Maithili even in thought, who was inaccessible to him 
as a name. That virtuous woman could never belong to any 
other than myself for she is to me what the light is to the sun. 
Her purity is manifest in the Three Worlds ; I could no more 
renounce Maithili, born of Janaka than a hero his honour. It 
behoveth me to follow your wise and friendly counsel, O 
Gracious Lords of the World." 
Having spoken thus, the victorious and extremely powerful 
Rama, full of glory, adored for his noble exploits, was re-united 
with his beloved and experienced the felicity he had merited. 
CHAPTER 121 
Dasaratha appears to Rama 
Hearing those excellent words uttered by Raghava, Maheshvara 
addressed him with even greater eloquence, saying : — 
" O Lotus-eyed One, O Thou the possessor of long arms and 
a broad chest, O Scourge of Thy foes, fortunate it is that thou 
hast accomplished this great feat, O Most Pious of Men ! 
" O Rama, it is well for all beings that thou hast dispelled this 
deep and dreadful darkness of the whole world, this fear created 
by Ravana. Go now and console the unfortunate Bharata with 
thy presence, the illustrious Kaushalya, Kaikeyi and Sumitra, 
the mother of Lakshmana, Rule over Ayodhya, giving satisfac tion to thine innumerable friends and establish the dynasty of 
the Ikshvaku Race. O Mighty Hero, having performed the 
Ashvamedha Sacrifice and acquired supreme renown, having 
distributed wealth among the brahmins, do thou attain the 
highest state. 
" Behold King Dasaratha standing in his chariot, thy sire, thy 
superior in the world of men, O Kakutstha ! Having crossed the 
342 
YUDDHA KANDA 
sea of relativity by thy grace, fill! of glory he has entered the 
region of Indra ; with thy brother Lakshmana pay homage to 
him! " 
Hearing the words of Mahadeva, Raghava who was accom panied by Lakshmana, bowed before his sire, who was standing 
in his aerial car on high, and that prince with his brother 
Lakshmana beheld his sire blazing in his own effulgence, clad 
in spotless raiment. With extreme delight, King Dasaratha, 
standing in his chariot, once again beheld his son who was as 
dear to him as his own life and that long-armed warrior, on his 
seat, took him in his lap and embracing him, said : — 
" Far from thee I do not prize the heaven in which I dwell 
with the Gods, O Rama, this is the truth ! O Most Eloquent of 
Men, the words addressed to me by Kaikeyi, which were designed 
to effect thy banishment, have never been erased from mine 
heart ! Embracing thee and Lakshmana and beholding thee 
well and happy, I am delivered from mine affliction as the sun 
when the mist has been dispelled. By thy grace, O My Son, thou 
who art truly filial and of noble soul, I am redeemed, as was the 
virtuous Brahmin Kahola by Ashtavakra. Now it is made clear 
to me, O Dear Child, that in order to destroy Ravana, the Gods 
determined that the supreme Purusha should become incarnate 
as man. 
"Assuredly Kaushalya will see all her desires fulfilled, O 
Rama, when she beholds thee returning from the forest, O 
Slayer of Thy Foes. O Rama, the people, seeing thee returning 
to the city and installed as king and ruler of the world, will 
indeed be blessed ! I desire to see thee re-united with Bharata, 
thy devoted, valiant, pure and loyal brother. Thou hast passed 
fourteen years in the forest with my beloved Sita and Lakshmana, 
O Dear Child. The term of thine exile is over, thy vows honoured, 
and further, by slaying Ravana on the battlefield, thou hast 
gratified the Gods. Thy task is accomplished ; thou hast won 
infinite renown, O Slayer of Thy Foes ; now, installed as king, 
mayest thou with thy brothers live for a long time ! " 
With joined palms, paying obeisance to King Dasaratha, who 
had thus addressed him, Rama answered : — 
" O Virtuous Sire, give thy blessings to Kaikeyi and Bharata ! 
Thou didst pronounce a terrible curse upon them, saying : — ' I 
343 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
renounce thee and thy son ! *, may this malediction not fall on 
Kaikeyi or her son, O Lord." ' Be it so ! ' replied that great 
monarch, paying obeisance with joined palms to Rama who had 
spoken thus, and thereafter embracing Lakshmana, he said to 
him : — 
" Thou hast acquired extreme merit, O Pious One, and thy 
fame will be great on earth ; by Rama's grace thou shalt attain 
heaven and thy power shall be inconceivable. Attend on Rama 
and be happy, O Thou who art the increaser of Sumitra's 
delight. Rama is ever engaged in the welfare of all beings. The 
Three Worlds with their Indras, the Siddhas and the great 
Rishis do honour to that great hero and adore him as the 
supreme Purusha. He, thy brother, is the invincible, imperish able Brahman, the essence of the Veda, which is secret, and the 
Inner Ruler of all, O Dear Child 1 Thou hast acquired great 
merit and glory in serving him and the Princess of Videha with 
devotion ! " 
Having spoken thus to Lakshmana, the King paid obeisance 
to Sita who stood before him with joined palms, and addressed 
her in gentle tones, saying : — 
" My Daughter, do not take it ill that Rama renounced thee ! 
O Vaidehi, he acted thus in thine own interest in order to 
demonstrate thine innocence ! The proof of thy chaste conduct, 
which thou hast given to-day, places thee above all other women. 
O My Daughter, thou hast no need to be instructed regarding 
thy duty towards thy husband, nevertheless I must tell thee that 
he is the Supreme God." 
Having thus addressed his two sons and Sita, King Dasaratha, 
the descendant of Raghu, ascended to the region of Indra in his 
chariot. Mounted on his aerial car, full of majesty, his body 
blazing with effulgence, that foremost of men, having given his 
counsel to his two sons and Sita, returned to the abode of the 
Sovereign of the Gods. 
344 
YUDDHA KANDA 
CHAPTER 122 
On Rama's request Indra restores the Army 
King Dasaratha having departed, Mahendra, the Vanquisher of 
Paka, addressed Raghava, who stood before him with joined 
palms, and said : — 
" O Rama, O Lion among Men, our presence here must not 
prove unfruitful ; we are pleased with thee ; ask what thou 
desirest ! " 
Hearing these magnanimous words of the blessed Mahendra, 
Raghava, of compassionate soul, answered him joyfully : — 
" Since thou wishest to gratify me, O Chief of the Vibudhas, 
grant me that which I ask of thee ! O Most Eloquent of Orators, 
let all the valiant monkeys, who for my sake descended into the 
region of death, be resuscitated and live again. I wish to see all 
those monkeys happy, who for my sake left their sons and wives, 
0 Great Lord. 
" Those courageous monkeys, those heroes who courted 
death and, crowning their sacrifice, succumbed, do thou restore 
to life, O Purandara \ Devoted to mine interests they disregarded 
death ; be gracious enough to give them back to their families ; 
1 solicit this favour of thee ! I wish to see the Golangulas and the 
Bears in all their former energy, freed from their sufferings and 
their wounds, O Munificent God. Let there be flowers, roots 
and fruits, even though they be out of season, and rivers with 
pure water in abundance wherever the monkeys are to be found." 
Hearing these words of the magnanimous Raghava, Mahendra 
answered graciously : — 
" Hard indeed to fulfil is this boon, thou dost crave, O Dear 
Prince of the Raghus, but my words never prove vain ; so be it ! 
May all those who have been slain in battle by the titans, the 
Bears and the Gopucchas, whose heads and arms have been 
severed, be resurrected ! May those monkeys rise up exalting, 
without pain or wounds, in all their natural vigour and courage, 
like sleepers who wake at the end of night, and let them be re united with their friends, relatives and tribes ! O Thou, the 
345 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Wielder of die Great Bow, may the trees be laden with fruit and 
flowers even out of season and the rivers be full of pure water." 
Thereupon those excellent monkeys, who were formerly 
covered with wounds, rose up healed, as persons who have been 
asleep, and there was general astonishment amongst the monkeys, 
who questioned each other, saying, ' What is this ? ' 
Seeing bis purpose fulfilled, the Gods, in an excess of joy, 
unanimously addressed Rama, who was accompanied by Laksh mana, praising him and saying : — 
" Now return to Ayodnya, O King and disband the monkeys ; 
do thou console the devoted and illustrious Maithili ! Seek out 
thy brother Bharata who, in sorrow of thy separation, has given 
himself up to penances. Approach the magnanimous Shatrughna 
and all thy mothers, O Scourge of Thy Foes ! Be installed as 
king and rejoice the hearts of the citizens by thy return ! " 
Having spoken thus to Rama who was accompanied by 
Saumitri, the Gods, paying obeisance to him, joyfully returned 
to heaven in their chariots blazing like the sun ; and Rama 
with his brother ordered the encampment of the army. 
Thereafter, under Rama and Lakshmana's protection, that 
great and glorious company of happy people, radiant with 
splendour, resembled the night illumined on all sides by that orb 
of cool rays. 
CHAPTER 123 
Bibishana places the Chariot Pushpaka at Rama's disposal 
Having passed the night, Rama the conqueror of bis foes, rose 
happily and Bibishana, paying obeisance to him with joined 
palms, addressed him, saying : — 
" Here are various articles for bathing such as unguents, 
ornaments, sandalwood paste, raiment and celestial garlands of 
every kind. Lotus-eyed women, versed in the art of applying 
perfume await thy pleasure, as is fitting, 0 Raghava 1 " 
At these words, Kakutstha answered Bibishana saying : — 
" Do thou invite the foremost of the monkeys and Sugriva to 
bathe first, for the pious Bharata, accustomed to happiness, that 
346 
YUDDHA KANDA 
youthful and loyal hero is suffering on mine account. Far from 
Bharata, Kaikeyi's son, who has been loyal to his duty, I do not 
value bathing or raiment or jewels ! Order it so that we may 
return to Ayodhya soon, assuredly the route is extremely 
arduous.'* 
Thus did Rama speak and Bibishana answered : — 
" I will arrange for thee to reach that city in one day, O 
Prince ! May happiness attend thee ! There is an aerial car 
named Pushpaka that shines like the sun, which the powerful 
Ravana forcibly took from Kuvera, having overcome him in 
combat. That celestial and marvellous chariot, going everywhere 
at will, is at thy disposal, O Thou of unequalled prowess ! That 
car, bright as a cloud, which will transport thee to Ayodhya in 
perfect safety, is here. But if I am worthy of a boon, if thou 
dost recall any merit in me, then remain here for at least one day, 
0 Virtuous One. If thou hast any friendship for me, then remain 
here with thy brother Lakshmana and Vaidehi, thy consort. 
Having received all possible homage, O Rama, thou shalt 
depart. I nave prepared those honours dictated by mine 
affection, O Rama, do thou enjoy them with thine innumerable 
friends and thine army also. I beg thee in all humility, out of my 
profound esteem and feeling of friendship for thee, O Raghava ; 
1 am thy servant and therefore may not command thee." 
Then Rama answered Bibishana, who had spoken thus in the 
presence of all the titans and monkeys and said : — 
" O Hero, Thou hast honoured me with thy friendship with 
thine whole soul and in all thine actions hast proved thy supreme 
affection for me. Nevertheless I cannot accept thy request, O 
King of the Titans, because my heart urges me to see my brother 
Bharata again, he who came to Chittrakuta in order to bring me 
back to Ayodhya though, as he bowed before me, I did not listen 
to his appeal. I wish to see Kaushalya, Sumitra and the illus trious Kaikeyi, as also mine house, my friends, the people of the 
city and the country. Grant me leave, O Dear Bibishana, Thou 
hast paid me sufficient honour ! Do not be angry, O My Friend, 
I beg of thee. O Foremost of the Titans, prepare the aerial car 
speedily, my task has been accomplished, what justification is 
there for reniaining here longer ? " 
Hearing Rama's words, that Indra among the Titans, Bibi- 
347 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
shana, hastened to order the aerial Chariot Pushpaka, gilded and 
bright as the sun, with its seats of emerald and pearl, its rooms 
ranged round about, silvered all over, its white banners and 
supports and gilded apartments enriched with golden lotuses 
which were hung with many bells. Round the windows, set 
with pearls and rare gems, rows of bells were placed giving forth 
a melodious sound, and that moving palace, resembling the peak 
of Mount Meru, constructed by Vishvakarma, abounded in rich 
ornaments, gold and jewels and sparkled with silver] and its floors 
were inlaid with crystal and the thrones of emerald (displayed 
there) furnished with rare coverings. 
Having prepared that indestructible vehicle, the Chariot 
Pushpaka, which was as swift as thought, Bibishana stood before 
Rama, and that aerial car, that went everywhere at one's will 
and resembled a mountain, having been placed at his disposal, 
the magnanimous Rama who was accompanied by Saumitri, was 
astonished. 
CHAPTER 124 
Rama sets out for Ayodhya 
The Chariot Pushpaka, having been prepared and adorned with 
flowers, Bibishana, who stood a litde way off with joined palms, 
reverendy enquired of Rama with some urgency, saying : — 
" What shall I do now, O Raghava ? " 
Then the supremely illustrious Raghava, having reflected 
awhile, in the presence of Lakshmana, made answer affectionately, 
saying: — 
"All the inhabitants of the woods have brought about the 
fulfilment of my mission by their efforts ; O Bibishana, do thou 
gratify them abundandy with jewels and riches of every kind. 
With their support thou hast recaptured Lanka, O Sovereign of 
the Titans ! Full of ardour, they did not fear to expose then lives nor did they ever retreat in combat. They have fulfilled 
their task ; now reward them by distributing gold and gems 
among them. When, in thy gratitude, thou hast loaded them 
with gifts, the monkeys will be fully satisfied. 
348 
YUDDHA KANDA 
" Thou dost know how to give and how to receive, thou art 
liberal and master of thy senses, all know thee to be a renunciate, 
it is for this that I address thee and exhort thee, O Prince ; a 
king will wage war in vain and his army abandon him at the first 
opportunity if he be wholly devoid of those qualities that render 
him pleasing to all." 
Hearing Rama's words, Bibishana bestowed precious gems and 
riches of every kind in abundance on all the monkeys and, 
beholding the foremost of the monkeys loaded with jewels and 
silver, Rama ascended the chariot of his adversary, holding the 
chaste and illustrious Vaidehi to his breast and accompanied by 
his brother Lakshmana, that valiant bow-man. 
Standing in the chariot, Kakutstha bade farewell to all the 
monkeys, to the mighty Sugriva and to Bibishana and said : — 
" O Foremost of Monkeys, you have accomplished all that 
could be asked of a friend, now go where you will, I give you all 
leave to depart. O Sugriva, thou who fearest nought but 
unrighteousness, thou hast done all that a devoted and loyal 
companion could do ; return to Kishkinda at the head of thine 
army. And thou, Bibishana, occupy the throne of Lanka that 
I have conferred upon thee. Even the inhabitants of heaven and 
their chiefs will not be able to trouble thee. I go to Ayodhya, 
that was the royal residence of my sire and wish to take leave of 
you all and to offer you my salutations 1 " 
Thus did Rama speak and all the leaders of the monkeys and 
the monkeys themselves as also the Titan Bibishana, paying 
obeisance with joined palms, answered : — 
'* We desire to go to Ayodhya, take us all with thee ! We shall 
delight in ranging the woods and copses and assisting at thine 
installation, of which thou art worthy. Having paid obeisance to 
the Queen Kaushalya, we shall return to our homes without 
delay, 0 Greatest of Kings ! " 
Thus did they speak and the virtuous Rama answered the 
monkeys, Sugriva and Bibishana, saying : — 
" Nothing would be more agreeable to me, as also to mine 
innumerable friends, than to return to the capital with you all. 
Hasten to take thy place with thy monkeys in the chariot, O 
Sugriva, and thou too, O Bibishana with thy ministers, O King 
of the Titans." 
349 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIK1 
Thereupon Sugriva with the monkeys and Bibishana with his 
counsellors, took their places in the celestial Pushpaka Chariot 
and, all being installed, that marvellous aerial car belonging to 
Kuvera rose into the air under Raghava's command. In the 
chariot, which shone brightly, and was harnessed to swans, Rama 
exulted, overcome with delight, and resembled Kuvera himself, 
whilst all the monkeys, bears and titans, full of vigour, seated 
comfortably in that celestial car travelled at ease. 
chapter 125 
Rama tells Sita of the Places over which they are passing 
Under Rama's command, that aerial chariot harnessed to swans 
flew through the air with a great noise, and Rama, the delight of 
the Raghus, letting fall his glance on every side, said to 
the Princess of Mithila, Sita, whose face resembled the 
moon : — 
" See how Lanka has been constructed by Vishvakarma on the 
summit of the Trikuta Mountain, which resembles the peak of 
Mount Kailasha. Behold the battlefield covered with a mire of 
flesh and blood ; there, O Sita, a great carnage of monkeys and 
titans took place. There lies the ferocious King of the Titans, 
Ravana, who, despite the boons he had received, was slain by me 
on thine account, O Large-eyed Lady. 
" Here Kumbhakarna was struck down as also another ranger 
of the night ; Prahasta and Dhumraksha perished here under the 
blows of the monkey, Hanuman. Vidyunmalin was put to death 
at this spot by the great-souled Sushena, and in another, Laksh mana overcame Indrajita, the son of Ravana. Angada struck 
down the Titans named Vikata and Virupaksha, hideous to look 
upon, as also Mahaparshwa and Mahodara. Akampana suc cumbed, as also other valiant warriors, Trishiras, Atikaya, 
Devantaka and Narantaka, Yuddhonmatta and Matta, both 
great heroes, Nikumbha and Kumbha, the two sons of Kumbha karna, who were full of courage ; Vajradamshtra, Damshtra and 
350 
YUDDHA KANDA 
innumerable other titans perished here and the invincible 
Maharaksha whom I slew in combat ; and Akampana1 was slain 
and the powerful Shonitaksha whilst Yupaksha and Prajangha 
also succumbed in the great struggle. Vidyujjihva, a titan of 
fearful aspect fell there and Yajnashatru died also ; the mighty 
Suptaghna too, as also Suryashatru, were slain with Brahma shatru, who had no equal, and here Mandodari's consort, for whom 
she wept surrounded by her companions to the number of a 
thousand or more. 
" Here is the place where the ocean was traversed, O Lady of 
Lovely Looks, and, having passed over the sea, there is the spot 
where the night was spent. There the bridge that I had thrown 
over the ocean of salty waves on thine account, O Large-eyed 
Lady, that causeway, difficult of construction, was built by Nala. 
Behold the ocean, O Vaidehi, that indestructible abode of Varuna's 
that seems without bourne, whose thundering waters abound in 
conch shells and pearls. O Maithili, behold that golden moun tain, which, cleaving the waves, rose out of the bosom of the deep 
in order to allow Hanuman to rest. And here, our headquarters 
were established ; here, formerly the Lord Mahadeva granted 
me a boon and there is the sacred and purifying spot known as 
Setubandha2 where even the greatest sins are washed away. 
Here Bibishana, King of the Titans, first came to me. Now we 
have reached Kishkindha with its beautiful woods, it is Sugriva's 
capital where I slew Bali." 
Then Sita, seeing the Gty of Kishkindha of which Bah' was 
formerly the support, said to Rama in gende, loving and wistful 
tones: — 
" I desire to enter thy royal capital, Ayodhya, O Prince, with 
the beloved consorts of Sugriva, Tara at their head, as also the 
wives of the other leaders of the monkeys ! " 
Thus spoke Vaidehi and Raghava answered, ' So be it ! ', 
thereafter reaching the heights of Kishkindha, he caused the 
aerial chariot to halt and said to Sugriva : — 
" O Lion among Monkeys, command all the Plavamgamas, 
accompanied by their wives, to come to Ayodhya with Sita and 
1 Akampana appears twice ; it is not known if it refers to the same warrior 
or another. 
* This place is still to be seen near Rameshwara — a place of pilgrimage. 
35« 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
myself. Let all come, O King, and make haste to depart, O 
Sugriva ! " 
Hearing Rama's command, he whose energy was immeasur able, Sugriva, the illustrious monarch of the monkeys, attended 
by his ministers entered the inner apartments and, seeing Tara, 
said to her : — 
" O Dear One, at the command of Raghava, who wishes to 
gratify Vaidehi, do thou speedily assemble the consorts of the 
magnanimous monkeys so that they may leave for Ayodhya to 
visit the wives of King Dasaratha." 
Hearing Sugriva's words, Tara, of beautiful limbs, gathered 
all the female monkeys together and said to them : — 
" Sugriva commands us to leave for Ayodhya ; do me the 
favour of accompanying me and witness the entry of Rama in 
the midst of the people from town and country and the splendour 
of the wives of Dasaratha." 
Thus commanded by Tara, the female monkeys, having first 
adorned themselves and circumambulated her, ascended the car, 
anxious to behold Sita, and that aerial chariot at once rose into 
the air with them. 
Then Raghava, gazing down on all sides, having reached the 
vicinity of Rishyamuka, once more addressed Vaidehi, saying : — 
" O Sita, here is a great mountain resembling a cloud rent by 
lightning, abounding in gold and other metals. It is here that I 
met that Indra among Monkeys, Sugriva, and entered into an 
agreement with him to slay Bali. Here is the Pampa Lake with 
its marvellous fields of blue lotuses and here separated from 
thee, out of the depth of mine affliction, I wept ! It was on its 
banks that beheld the virtuous Shabari. 
" Here I slew Kabandha, whose arms extended tor four miles ! 
O Sita, in Janasthana, I came upon that magnificent tree, the 
Ashwatta, near which Jatayu, the renowned and valiant Monarch 
of Birds perished under Ravana's blows on thine account, O 
Lovely One. And there is our hermitage, O Lady of Brilliant 
Complexion, where our enchanting leafy hut may be seen. It is 
there that thou wert borne away by force by the King of the 
Titans. 
" There is the ravishing Godavari of transparent waters and 
there, the retreat of Agastya can be seen, that is covered with 
352 
YUDDHA KANDA 
palms, as also Sharabhanga's hermitage where the God of a 
Thousand Eyes, the Destroyer of Gties, entered in secret. O 
Goddess of slender waist, behold the ascetics with Atri at their 
head, the equal of Surya and Vaishnava ; in that place the Giant 
Viradha fell under my blows and there, O Sita, thou didst visit 
the virtuous Sage. See, O Lady of beautiful form, the King of 
Mountains, Chittrakuta, appears ; it is there that the son of 
Kaikeya came to crave my forgiveness. Here is the enchanting 
Yamuna with its ravishing woods and here the retreat of 
Bharadwaja looms into view, O Maithili. Now we are in sight of 
the Ganges, that three-branched sacred river. There is the City 
of Shringavera where my friend, Guha, dwells, and there, 
the River Sarayu with rows of stone pillars on its banks 
commemorating the Kings of the House of Ikshvaku ! Behold 
there the royal abode of my Sire ! O Vaidehi, bow down to 
Ayodhja, we have returned ! " 
During this time the monkeys and the titans were leaping 
about in delight on seeing that city and, with the palaces with 
which it abounded, its wide spaces and the elephants and horses 
that filled it, Ayodhya appeared to the monkeys and titans to 
resemble Amaravati, the city of the mighty Indra. 
CHAPTER 126 
Rama's Meeting with the Sage Bharadaaja 
Having completed the fourteen years of exile, on the fifth day of 
the lunar fortnight, the elder brother of Lakshmana reached the 
hermitage of Bharadwaja and bowed low before that Ascetic. 
Paying obeisance to him, he enquired of the Sage, saying : — 
" O Blessed One, dost thou know if all are well and happy in 
the city ? Is Bharata fixed in his duty ? Do my mothers still 
live?" 
Thus did Rama question Bharadwaja and that great Sage, 
smiling, answered the Prince of the Raghus cheerfully and 
said: — 
" Bharata, his locks matted, carrying out thine instructions, 
353 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
awaits thy return. In the presence of thy sandals, to which he 
pays homage, he rules all in the best interests of thy family and 
country. 
" Beholding thee clad in bark, setting out on foot, thy consort 
making the third,1 banished from thy kingdom, entirely devoted 
to thy duty, obedient to the behests of thy sire, renouncing every 
pleasure, like unto a God driven from heaven, formerly I was 
filled with pity for thee; then, O Victorious Warrior, thou, 
dispossessed by Kaikeyi, nourished thyself on fruits and roots ; 
but now I see thee, thy purpose accomplished surrounded by 
friends and kinsfolk, having triumphed over thine enemy and 
my joy is supreme ! 
" I know all that thou hast experienced of good and ill whilst 
dwelling in Janasthana, O Raghava, and how, engaged in 
procuring the welfare of the Sages, seeking to protect them all, 
thine irreproachable consort was borne away by Ravana. I 
know of die appearance of Maricha and Sita's delusion ; the 
meeting with Kabandha; thine arrival at Lake Fampa, the 
alliance with Sugriva when Bali fell under thy blows ; the search 
for Vaidehi and the exploit of the Wind-god's son ; the construc tion of the causeway by Nala and the finding of Vaidehi ; how 
Lanka was set on fire by the foremost of the monkeys whilst he 
was bound ; how Ravana, proud of his strength, fell in the fight 
with his sons, kinsfolk, ministers, infantry and cavalry ; how 
after the death of Ravana, who was a thorn in the side of the 
Gods, thou didst meet the Celestials and receive a boon from 
them ; all these things I know by virtue of my penances, O Hero, 
0 Thou who art fixed in virtue. 
" Therefore I have sent my disciples to carry the news to the 
city and I too will grant thee a boon, O Most Skilful of Warriors ; 
but first accept the Arghya, to-morrow thou shalt go to Ayodhya," 
Hearing these words, the illustrious prince, with bowed head, 
answered joyfully, * It is well ! ' and made the following request :- 
" On the road I take to reach Ayodhya, though it is not the 
season, yet may all the trees bear honeyed fruits and those fruits 
have the fragrance of 'Amrita " and may every variety be found 
there; O Blessed One ! " 
1 Rama and Lakshmana being the other two. 
* Amrita — Nectar of Immortality. 
YUDDHA KANDA 
Thereupon the Sage replied : " So be it ! Thy desire shall be 
realised immediately ! " Then the trees of that region instantly 
resembled those of Paradise. Those that had none, grew fruits, 
and those that had no flowers were covered with blossom; 
trees that had withered were enveloped with foliage and all 
dripped with honey for three leagues along the way. 
Meanwhile the foremost of the monkeys regaled themselves on 
those celestial fruits to the extent of their desire and, transported 
with joy, imagined they had entered heaven. 
chapter 127 
Rama sends Hanuman to seek out Bharata 
When he beheld Ayodhya, that descendant of Raghu of rapid 
step full of magnanimity, gave himself up to pleasant thoughts 
and, having reflected awhile, that fortunate and illustrious 
hero said to the monkey, Hanuman : — 
" Hasten with all speed to Ayodhya, O Foremost of Monkeys, 
and ascertain if all are happy in the royal palace. Passing 
Shringavera, communicate with Guha, King of the Nishadas, 
who dwells in a wooded country, and offer him my salutations. 
When he hears that I am safe and well, freed from all anxieties, 
he will be content, for he is my second self and my friend. He 
will gladly show thee the way to Ayodhya and give thee tidings 
of Bharata. Do thou enquire of Bharata as to his well-being and 
inform him that I have returned with my consort and Laksh mana, my mission accomplished. Tell him of Site's abduction 
by the ruthless Ravana, of my meeting with Sugriva and the 
death of Bali in combat ; of how I set out to find Maithili and 
how thou didst discover her, having crossed the great waters of 
that domain of the unchangeable Lord of Rivers ! Tell him of 
our arrival on the shores of the sea, the appearance of Sagara and 
how the causeway was constructed ; how Ravana perished ; of 
the boons bestowed on me by Mahendra, Brahma and Varuna 
and, by the favour of Mahadeva, the meeting with my Sire. 
355 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Inform Bharata, O My Friend, that I am coming accompanied 
by King Bibishana and the Lord of the Monkeys. Say to him, 
' Having overcome the army of the enemy and attained a glory 
without parallel, Rama, his purpose accomplished, is approaching 
with his valiant friends '. Do thou carefully observe the expres sion on the face of Bharata when he hears these tidings and how 
he comports himself. Thou wilt know all by his gestures, the 
colour of his face, his glances and his words. Whose mind 
would not be moved by the thought of (ascending) an ancestral 
throne, fulfilling all one's dreams, and to a kingdom abounding 
in prosperity, hosts of elephants, horses and chariots ? If 
the fortunate Bharata wishes to reign in his own right, then, 
by mutual agreement, let that descendant of Raghu govern 
the entire earth ! " 
On receiving these instructions} Hanuman, born of Maruta, 
assuming human form, left in all haste for Ayodhya and 
advanced with speed, like unto Garuda swooping on a great serpent 
on which he wishes to lay hold. Traversing the path-way of his 
sire, the shining abode of great birds and, crossing over the 
formidable confluence of the Ganges and the Yamuna, he reached 
the City of Shringavera. Then the valiant Hanuman sought out 
Guha and said to him, his voice ringing with joy : — 
" Thy friend, Kakutstha, that true hero who is accompanied 
by Sita as also Saumitri, enquires as to thy welfare. Having 
spent the fifth night of the moon with the Sage Bharadwaja, on 
his request, Raghava has now taken leave of him and thou wilt 
see him to-morrow." 
Having said this, the illustrious and agile Hanuman, whose 
hair stood on end with delight, rushed on regardless of fatigue. 
Thereafter he crossed the river sacred to Parasurama, and the 
Valukini, Varuthi and Gaumati and the formidable forest of 
Sala Trees, also many densely populated countries and opulent 
cities. Having journeyed a great distance that foremost of 
monkeys came to the flowering trees that grow in the neighbour hood of Nandigrama and resemble those of Chaitaratha, the 
gardens of the King of the Celestials. There he beheld people 
who, with their wives, sons and grandsons, well-attired were 
given up to enjoyment in those pleasant surroundings. 
Thereafter, at a distance of one league from Ayodhya, he 
35« 
YUDDHA KANDA 
observed Bharata, clad in a black antelope skin, sad, emaciated, 
wearing matted locks, his limbs besmeared with dust, dwelling 
in a hermitage, afflicted on account of his brother's misfortune. 
living on fruit and roots, practising penance, self-controlled, 
his hair knotted, dressed in bark and a black antelope skin, 
disciplined, pure of soul, like unto a Brahmarishi in radiance, he, 
having placed Rama's sandals before him, ruled the earth by 
protecting the four castes from every peril with the aid of his 
ministers, and virtuous priests and senior officers wearing red robes 
surrounded him. And his subjects, faithful to their duty, had 
resolved not to neglect the welfare of their king, who resembling, 
righteousness itself, seemed to be the God of Dharma incarnate. 
Then Hanuman, paying obeisance with joined palms, said to 
that loyal prince : — 
" Thy brother, Kakutstha, for whose exile to the Forest of 
Dandaka in robes of bark and matted locks, thou grievest, 
enquires as to thy welfare. I bring thee good tidings, O Prince, 
abandon thy despair ; the moment has come when thou wilt be 
re-united with thy brother Rama. Having slain Ravana and 
recovered Maithili, Raghava is returning with his valiant friends, 
his purpose accomplished. The mighty Lakshmana too is 
coming and the illustrious Vaidehi, Rama's devoted companion, 
as Sachi is to Mahendra." 
Hearing Hanuman's words, Bharata, the son of Kaikeyi 
swooned with joy, felicity causing him to lose consciousness. In 
a moment, however, the descendant of Raghu, Bharata, rose up 
breathing with an effort and addressed Hanuman who bad 
brought him those pleasant tidings. Deeply moved, the fortu nate Bharata, embracing the monkey bedewed him with his 
tears that fell from him in great drops, inspired not by suffering 
but by joy, and said : — 
" Whether thou be god or man who has come hither out of 
compassion for me, O My Friend, I wish to bestow a gift on thee 
for the happy tidings thou hast brought me. I offer thee a 
hundred thousand cows, as also a hundred prosperous villages 
and sixteen youthful women for thy consorts, possessed of curls, 
with sweet expressions, golden skins, shapely noses, lovely 
ankles and gracious mien, resembling the moon, adorned with 
every kind of ornament, all of noble families." 
ax 357 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Hearing from that Prince of Monkeys of the miraculous return 
of Rama, Bharata, whose desire to behold his brother again threw 
him into a transport of delight, added joyfully : — 
CHAPTER 128 
Hanuman tells Bharata of all that befell Rama and Sita 
during their exile 
" Verily it is with joy that I learn these tidings of my protector 
after the innumerable years that he has passed in the forest. How 
felicitous is the well-known saying, ' Happiness comes to man 
even if it be after a hundred years ! ' How did Raghava and the 
monkeys conclude an alliance and for what purpose ? Answer 
my questions candidly ! " 
Thus interrogated by the prince, Hanuman, seating himself 
on a heap of Kusha Grass, began to describe Rama's life in the 
forest and said : — 
" O Lord, thou knowest how he was exiled on account of 
the two boons bestowed on thy mother ; how the King Dasaratha 
died in consequence of his son's banishment ; how the messen- 
gers, O Lord, brought thee back from Rajagriha ; how, returning 
to Ayodhya, thou didst refuse the crown ; how thou didst go 
to Chittrakuta to appeal to thy brother, the scourge of his foes, 
begging him to accept the throne, thus conforming to the way of 
virtuous men ; how Rama renounced the kingdom and how, on 
returning, thou didst bring back the sandals of that illustrious 
hero ; all this, O Long-armed Warrior is well-known to thee but 
what happened subsequent to thy departure, now hear from me ! 
"After thy return, distress seized the denizens of the forest, 
creating a great turmoil. Thereupon Rama, Sita and Lakshmana 
entered the huge, dreadful and lonely Dandaka Forest that was 
trodden down by elephants and formidable with its lions, tigers 
and deer. Having penetrated into its depths, the powerful 
Viradha appeared before them emitting fearful cries. Lifting 
him up, as he was roaring like a great elephant, those two 
358 
YUDDHA KANDA 
warriors threw him headlong into a pit and having accomplished 
that difficult exploit} the two brothers, Rama and Lakshmana, 
at dusk reached the enchanting hermitage of Sharabhanga. That 
Sage having ascended to heaven, Rama, a true hero, paid 
obeisance to the ascetics and thereafter went to Janasthana. 
" Fourteen thousand titans, who dwelt in Janasthana, were 
slain during the time that the mighty Raghava resided there. 
For having fallen into the hands of the only Rama, during the 
fourth watch, those demons were wholly exterminated. Taking 
advantage of their great power, in order to harass the ascetics, 
those demons, inhabitants of the Dandaka Forest, were slain by 
Rama in combat. The demons slain and Khara also, Rama then 
despatched Dushana and subsequently Trishiras. Thereafter 
a female demon, named Shurpanakha, accosted him and, being 
ordered to do so, Lakshmana, rising, took up his sword and 
instantly cut off her ears and nose. Thus mutilated, that titan 
woman took refuge with Ravana. 
" Then a redoubtable titan in Ravana's service, named 
Maricha, assuming the form of a jewelled deer, beguiled Vaidebi, 
who, on beholding it, said to Rama : — 
" ' O My Beloved, capture it for me, it will enliven our 
solitude.* 
" Raghava, bow in hand, rushed out in pursuit of that deer 
and destroyed it with a single arrow, O My Friend. 
" While Raghava, however, was thus engaged in the chase, 
Lakshmana too had left the hermitage, and Dashagriva, entering 
there, speedily took hold of Sita, as Graha seizes Rohini in the 
sky. Slaying the Vulture Jatayu, who sought to deliver her, the 
titan, taking hold of Sita, departed in all haste for his capital. 
Meanwhile some strange looking monkeys, as large as hills, 
standing on the summit of a mountain, astonished, observed 
Ravana, the King of the Titans proceeding with Sita in his 
arms; and, mounting into the sky with her in the Chariot 
Pushpaka, which was as swift as thought, the all-powerful 
Ravana returned to Lanka. There he entered his vast palace 
decorated with pure gold and, with many words, sought to 
console Vaidehi but she, regarding his speech and his person 
with disdain and as less than a straw, was imprisoned in the 
Ashoka Grove. 
359 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
" Meantime Rama returned, having slain the deer in the forest 
and, as he did so, he beheld the vulture so beloved of his sire, 
dead, at which he suffered extreme distress. Thereafter Raghava 
with Lakshmana set out in search of Vaidehi and they crossed 
the Godavari River with its flowering woodlands. 
" In the great forest, the two princes met a titan, named 
Kabandha, counselled by whom that true hero repaired to the 
Mountain Rishyamuka in order to confer with Sugriva and, even 
before they met, they were firm friends. 
" Sugriva had formerly been banished by his irascible brother 
Bali and, in consequence of this meeting, a sound alliance was 
formed between them. Rama, by the strength of his arms 
established him on the throne, having slain Bah, that giant full 
of valour, in the field. Regaining his kingdom, Sugriva vowed 
in return to set out with all the monkeys in order to find the 
princess and, under the command of their magnanimous 
sovereign, ten kotis of those Flavamgamas repaired to different 
regions. 
" Whilst, discouraged, we were resting on the lofty Vindhya 
Mountain, plunged in despair, a long time passed. Meanwhile 
the powerful brother of the King of the Vultures, named Sampati, 
informed us that Sita was dwelling in Ravana's palace, where upon I, whom thou seest here, was able to dispel the grief of my 
companions and, resorting to mine own prowess, crossed over a 
hundred leagues of sea and discovered Maithili alone in the 
Ashoka Grove, clad in a soiled silken cloth, stained with dust, 
afflicted yet faithful to her conjugal vow. Approaching that 
irreproachable lady I paid obeisance to her and bestowed a ring 
on her in Rama's name as a pledge, and she, in her turn, gave me 
a brilliant jewel. 
" My mission accomplished, I returned and gave Rama that 
token, the bright gem ; and he, receiving tidings of Maithili, 
regained his zest for life, as one, who in extremity, drinks 
Amrita. Summoning up his strength, he resolved to overthrow 
Lanka, as, when the time has come, Vibhabasu prepares to 
destroy the worlds. 
" Reaching the shores of the sea, the Prince commanded Nala 
to construct a causeway and the army of valiant monkeys crossed 
the ocean on that bridge. 
3<So 
YUDDHA KANDA 
" Prahasta fell under the blows of Nila, Kumbbakarna under 
those of Raghava, Lakshmana slew Havana's son and Rama, 
Ravana himself. Having been received by the Grantex of Boons, 
Shakra, as also Yama, Varuna and Mahadeva, Swyambhu and 
Dasaratha, Rama was showered with favours by all the Risbis. 
The glorious Kakutstha, Scourge of His Foes, was rendered 
happy by obtaining these boons and returned to Kishkindha 
accompanied by the monkeys in the Chariot Pushpaka. 
" He has reached the Ganges once more and is dwelling with 
the Sage,1 where without hindrance, thou sbouldst behold him 
to-morrow, when the Pushya Star is in an auspicious aspect ! " 
Thereupon, hearing Hanuman's delightful words, Bharata, 
full of joy, paid obeisance to him and, in accents pleasing to the 
heart, said: — 
"After a long time my desires are at last fulfilled ! " 
chapter 129 
Bharata sets out to meet Rama 
Hearing those marvellous tidings, Bharata, that real hero, the 
slayer of hostile warriors, delighted, issued a command to 
Shatrughna, saying : — 
" Let all righteous men, having purified themselves, worship 
all the Deities and sacred altars of the city with fragrant garlands 
and diverse musical instruments. Let the bards conversant with 
the tradition and all the panegyrists, with the queens, ministers, 
guards, the army, the courtiers, brahmins, nobles and the fore most of the artisans issue forth from the capital in companies, in 
order to behold the countenance of Rama, which is as lovely as 
the moon." 
At this behest, Shatrughna, the slayer of hostile warriors, 
called together some thousands of labourers, whom he divided 
into groups, and he said to them : — 
" Fill up the hollows and level the uneven ground from 
Ayodhya to Nandigrama. Sprinkle every part with water as 
cold as ice and let others scatter roasted grain and flowers 
1 The Sage Bharadwaja. 
361 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
everywhere ; set up large standards on all the main highways of 
the capital. At the rising of the sun, let all the dwellings be 
adorned with crowns and garlands, with many flowers and decor ations in five colours ; let contingents of soldiers stand along 
the royal highway to keep it free." 
At this command from Shatrughna, which rilled everyone with 
joy, Dhristi, Jayanti, Vijaya, Siddhartha, Arthasadhaka, Ashoka, 
Mantrapala and Sumantra set out. Thousands of elephants 
intoxicated with ichor and female elephants with golden girths, 
bearing standards, splendidly adorned, on which illustrious 
warriors were mounted, issued forth, whilst others set out on 
horses and in chariots also, and warriors armed with spears, 
cutlasses and nets, furnished with banners and pennants were 
escorted by the foremost of their leaders and thousands of 
infantry. 
Thereafter the litters, bearing the consorts of King Dasaratha, 
with Kaushalya and Sumitra at their head, also set out. And 
Bharata, ever fixed in his duty, surrounded by the Twice-born, 
the elders of the city, the merchants and counsellors with garlands 
and sweetmeats in their hands, rejoiced by the sound of conches 
and drums, his praises sung by panegyrists, having placed the 
sandals of the illustrious Rama on his head, took up the white 
parasol decorated with bright garlands and two golden chowries 
made of Yaks tails, worthy of a king. Then that magnanimous 
prince, emaciated by long fasting, pale, wearing robes of bark 
and a black antelope skin, yet full of joy at the tidings of his 
brother's approach, set out with his escort to meet Rama and the 
sound of the horses hooves, the noise of the chariot wheels, the 
blare of conches and beat of drums, the roaring of elephants, the 
blast of trumpets and booming of gongs caused the earth to 
tremble as the whole city proceeded to Nandigrama. 
Thereafter Bharata, glancing round, said to Hanuman, the 
son of Pavana : — 
" Is it due to the levity of thy monkey nature that I do not 
behold Rakutstha, the illustrious Rama, Scourge of His Foes ? 
Neither are those monkeys, able to change their form at will, to 
be seen ! " 
To these words, Hanuman, testifying to the truth, answered 
the virtue-loving Bharata, saying : — 
362 
YUDDHA KANDA 
" That sylvan army has reached the trees covered with fruit 
and flowers, flowing with honey, where the humming of bees 
intoxicated with love can be heard. All this was created by 
virtue of a boon bestowed by Vasava on the Sage Bharadwaja, as 
a reward for his great hospitality. One can hear their shouts of 
delight and, to my mind, those monkeys have crossed the River 
Gaumati. Observe that immense cloud of dust near the wood ; 
in mine estimation, the monkeys are shaking the boughs of the 
Sala Trees ; behold that aerial chariot, bright as the moon, which 
can be seen in the distance, it is the celestial Car Fushpaka 
created by Brahma's thought and was obtained by that hero after 
he had skin Ravana and his kinsfolk. Glittering like the rising 
sun, that celestial chariot, swift as thought, that is bearing Rama, 
belongs to Dhanada, who received it from Brahma. In it are the 
two valiant brothers, offspring of the House of Raghu, accom panied by Vaidehi, the supremely illustrious Sugriva and the 
Titan Bibishana." 
At that moment, from women, children, youthful persons and 
the aged, the joyful clamour ' Rama has come ! * arose, reaching 
the skies. 
Alighting from their chariots, elephants and horses in order to 
go on foot, the people beheld that prince standing in his aerial 
car, resembling the moon in the sky. With joined palms, 
Bharata advanced joyfully to meet Rama, to whom he paid 
obeisance, offering him water wherewith to wash his hands and 
feet, as also the Arghya. 
In that chariot, created by Brahma's thought, the elder 
brother of Bharata with his large eyes, looked as radiant as the 
God who bears the Thunderbolt. Then Bharata, with a deep 
bow, paid reverence to his brother Rama, who was seated in the 
car, like unto the sun on the summit of Mount Meru, and at 
Rama's command, that swift and excellent vehicle, harnessed to 
swans, descended to earth. Then the faithful Bharata approach ing Rama, full of joy paid obeisance once more, and Kakutstha, 
drawing Bharata to him, whom he had not seen for a long time, 
caused him to sit on his lap, embracing him affectionately. 
Thereafter, Bharata, the scourge of his foes, approached Laksh mana and Vaidehi and saluted them lovingly ; then the son of 
Kaikeyi embraced Sugriva, Jambavan, Angada, Mainda, 
3<*3 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
Dvivida, Nila and Rishabha also, and Sushena, Nala, Gavaksha, 
Gandhamadana, Sharabha and Panasa, clasping them in turn in 
his anns. 
In the form of men, those monkeys, able to change their shape 
at will, gaily wished Bharata good fortune ; then, after embracing 
him, that prince, full of valour, said to Sugriva, that lion among 
monkeys ; — 
" We are four brothers, thou shalt be the fifth, O Sugriva ; 
benevolence creates friendship and malevolence enmity ! " 
Thereafter Bharata addressed Bibishana in comforting words, 
saying: — 
" Be thou blessed ; thy co-operation ensured the success of 
this difficult enterprise ! " 
At that instant, Shatrughna, having paid obeisance to Rama 
and Lakshmana, bowed reverently to the feet of Sita, Then 
Rama approached his mother, who was pale and drawn with 
grief and, prostrating himself, touched her feet, thus rejoicing 
her heart, after which he saluted Sumitra and the renowned 
Kaikeyi, thereafter paying obeisance to the other Queens and 
his spiritual preceptor. 
Then all the citizens, with joined palms said to Rama : — 
" Be thou welcome, O Long-armed Hero, thou art the increaser 
of Kaushalya's delight ! " 
To the elder brother of Bharata, those thousands of hands 
joined in salutation caused the inhabitants of the city to appear 
like a lotus in flower. 
Then Bharata, conversant with his duty, himself took Rama's 
sandals and fastened them on the feet of that Indra among Men 
and thereafter, with joined palms, said to him ; — 
" This kingdom that I received in trust, I now render back to 
thee in its entirety. To-day, since I see thee as Lord of Ayodhya, 
the purpose of mine existence has been fulfilled and my desires 
consummated. Now examine thy treasury, thy storehouses, thine 
house and thine army ; by thy grace, I have increased them 
tenfold ! " 
These words uttered by Bharata out of fraternal love, caused 
the monkeys and the Titan Bibishana to shed tears. Thereafter, 
in his joy, Raghava made Bharata sit on his lap and, with his 
chariot and army, proceeded to the hermitage. 
3«4 
YUDDHA KANDA 
Reaching that place with Bharata and his troops, Rama 
alighted from his aerial car and thereafter spoke to that most 
excellent chariot, saying : — 
" Now go hence and place thyself at Vaishravana's disposal, I 
give thee leave to depart." 
Thus dismissed by Rama, that excellent car proceeded in a 
northerly direction and reached Dhanada's abode. The celestial 
Car Pushpaka, which had been borne away by the Titan Ravana, 
returned at Rama's command with all speed to Dhanada. 
As Shakra touches the feet of Brihaspati, Raghava, having 
touched the feet of his friend, his spiritual preceptor, seated 
himself by his side, a little way apart, on an excellent seat. 
chapter 130 
Rama is installed as King : The Benefits that accrue 
from the Recitation and Hearing of the Ramayana 
Raising his joined palms to his forehead, Bharata, the increaser 
of Kaikeyi's delight, said to his elder brother, Rama, that true 
hero: — 
" Thou hast honoured my mother by conferring the kingdom 
on me ; now I give back to thee that which was entrusted to me. 
How can I, who am but a young steer, bear the heavy load that 
one full grown is scarcely able to sustain ? To my mind, it is as 
hard to preserve the boundaries of this kingdom as to build up a 
dam which has been swept away by a torrent. How can a 
donkey outpace a horse or a crow surpass a swan in flight ? Nor 
am I able to follow in thy footsteps, O Hero, O Scourge of Thy 
Foes ! As a tree with a vast trunk and branches, planted in a 
courtyard, that has grown immense and difficult to climb, dries 
up when it has blossomed without yielding any fruit, so, O Long armed Prince, if, being our master, thou dost not uphold us all, 
we thy servants, are in the same case ! 
"Let the universe to-day witness thine enthronement} O 
Raghava, thou who art as radiant as the sun at noon in all its 
effulgence. From henceforth, let it be to the sound of gongs, 
365 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
the tinkling of girdles and anklets and the gentle strains of 
melodious singing that thou dost wake and fall asleep. Do thou 
rule the world as long as the sun revolves and the earth endures." 
Hearing Bharata's words, Rama, the conqueror of hostile 
cities, answered ' So be it ! * and took his place on an excellent 
seat. 
Thereafter, at the command of Shatrughna, skilled and deft handed barbers quickly surrounded Raghava ; and first Bharata 
bathed and the mighty Lakshmana also, then Sugriva, that Indra 
among Monkeys, followed by Bibishana, the Lord of the Titans ; 
whereupon Rama, his matted locks shorn, performed his 
ablutions and he was clothed in robes of great price, covered 
with garlands and sprinkled with every kind of perfume; 
thereafter he re-appeared blazing in his own effulgence. The 
hero, Bharata, attended on Rama's robing and Shatrughna, the 
upholder of the prosperity of the Ikshvakus, on Lakshmana's, 
and all the consorts of King Dasaratha attended on Sita. Kau shalya, in love of her son, herself adorned all the consorts of the 
monkeys with joy. 
Then Shatrughna, having issued the command, Sumantra 
harnessed a magnificent chariot and when that celestial car, 
bright as flame, had been brought before him, Rama, that long armed warrior, conqueror of hostile citadels, took his place 
therein. Sugriva and Hanuman, whose beauty equalled 
Mahendra's, bathed and attired in robes of divine loveliness and 
sparkling earrings, followed ; thereafter Sugriva's consorts, as 
also Sita, advanced eager to behold the capital. 
In Ayodhya all the ministers of King Dasaratha, with Rama's 
spiritual Preceptor Vasishtha, at their head, took counsel as to 
what ought to be done ; and Ashoka, Vijaya and Siddhartha, 
with undivided mind, entered into consultation regarding the 
honours to be paid to Rama by the city and said : — 
" Prepare all that is needed for the coronation of the magnani mous Rama, who is worthy of this honour, beginning with the 
benedictory prayer." 
Having issued these orders, the ministers as also the spiritual 
Preceptor set forth from the city in haste, in order to behold 
Rama, who resembled the God of a Thousand Eyes in his chariot 
drawn by bay horses. And Raghava, seated in his car, proceeded 
366 
YUDDHA KANDA 
along the highway to his capital ; Bharata took up the reins, 
Shatrughna the parasol, Lakshmana the fan and Sugriva one of 
the chowries, whilst that Indra among the Titans, Bibishaaa, 
held the second that was made of Yaks tails of dazzling whiteness 
and like unto the moon, waving it to and fro over the prince, 
behind whom he stood. At that instant, the sweet music of 
Rama's praises rang out in the sky sung by companies of Rishis 
and Gods with the Marut Hosts. 
The illustrious Sugriva, that bull among the monkeys, was 
mounted on an elephant named Sbatrumjaya, as high as a hill, 
and nine thousand elephants carried the monkeys, who in the 
form of men, proceeded along the way, adorned with, ornaments 
of every kind. 
Then that Lord of Men advanced towards the city encircled 
with palaces, to the sound of conches and the roll of drums ; and 
the inhabitants of die city beheld Raghava radiant with beauty 
advancing in his chariot, and, having exchanged salutations, 
they took up their places behind Kakutstha, the magnanimous 
Rama, surrounded by his brothers. In the midst of his coun sellors, the brahmins and the people, Rama shone with splendour 
like unto the moon amidst the stars ; and, as he advanced along 
the highway, preceded by the musicians and those who bore the 
Swastika on the palms of their hands, he was attended by a 
joyous crowd. Before Rama marched those who carried roasted 
grain and gold, and virgins and kine were there with the Twice born and men with their hands full of Modaka.1 
Meantime Rama informed his ministers of his alliance with 
Sugriva and of the prowess of the son of Anila; and the monkeys 
and the inhabitants of Ayodhya were astounded by the narrative 
concerning the monkeys' exploits and the valour of the titans. 
Whilst relating these incidents, the illustrious Rama, who was 
attended by the Vanaras, entered Ayodhya, which was filled with 
healthy and happy people, and where every house was decorated. 
Thereafter they came to the ancestral dwelling, the abode of 
the descendants of Ikshvaku, and that prince, the delight of the 
House of Raghu, paid obeisance to Kaushalya, Sumitra and 
Kaikeyi and thereafter addressed Bharata in gentle and reason able words saying : — 
1 Modaka— A kind of sweetmeat. 
3«7 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
" Let Sugriva stay in the magnificent palace, set amidst the 
woods in the Ashoka Grove, which abounds in pearls and 
emeralds." 
At these words, Bharata, that true hero, took Sugriva by the 
hand and led him into the palace. Meanwhile servants bearing 
oil lamps, couches and carpets entered immediately as comman ded by Shatrughna and the exceedingly valiant younger brother 
of Raghava said to Sugriva :— 
" Do Thou, O Lord, issue thy commands for Rama's 
coronation ! " 
On this, Sugriva gave over four golden urns encrusted with 
gems to the monkey leaders, saying : — 
" To-morrow, at dawn, see to it that ye return with your urns 
filled from the four seas, O Monkeys." 
At this command, those powerful monkeys, resembling 
elephants, immediately rose into the air, so that tbey looked like 
swift eagles, and they were Jambavan, Hanuman, Vegadarshin 
and Rishabha, who brought back their urns filled with water, 
whilst five hundred other monkeys drew water in their jars from 
five hundred rivers. The mighty and valorous Sushena returned 
with his vessel, adorned with every variety of gem, bearing 
water from the eastern sea ; Rishabha, without delay, brought 
water from the southern sea ; Gavaya, with his urn powdered 
with red sandal and camphor, rilled it at the vast ocean of the 
west, and Hanuman, the marvellous son of Anila, who was as 
swift as the wind, with his huge urn, encrusted with diamonds, 
drew water from the icy northern sea. 
Beholding the water brought by those foremost of monkeys 
for Rama's coronation, Shatrughna, attended by servants, 
imparted the tidings to the chief Priest Vasishtha, and his 
companions, and that venerable one hastened there with the 
brahmins, whereupon he caused Rama accompanied by Sita, to 
ascend a throne inlaid with precious gems. Then Vasishtha, 
Vijaya, Javali, Kashyapa, Katyayana, Gautama and Vamadeva 
consecrated that lion among men with pure and fragrant water, 
as the Vasus crowned Vasava of a Thousand Eyes. 
Then the Ritvijs and the Brahmins with sixteen virgins, 
counsellors, warriors, as also the merchants, were full of joy and 
Rama was sprinkled with pure water, and the Celestial Beings, 
YUDDHA KANDA 
standing in the firmament with the Lokapalas and the Gods 
assembled to anoint him with the juice of all the sacred herbs. 
And having been crowned by the magnanimous Vasishtha, 
the priests placed royal vestments upon him ; and Shatrughna 
bore the immaculate shining canopy, and Sugriva, the King of 
the Monkeys, the chowry made of Yaks tails, the Lord of the 
Titans, Bibishana carrying the second, that was as bright as the 
moon. Thereafter, on Vasava's command, Vayu bestowed on 
Raghava a brilliant golden garland embellished with a hundred 
lotuses, and a necklace of pearls enriched with every variety of 
gem was also conferred on that Lord of Men by Shakra. 
The Gods and Gandharvas sang and troops of Apsaras 
danced at the installation of the virtuous Rama, who was worthy 
of that honour. The earth too was covered with rich crops and 
the trees with their fruit and flowers gave forth their fragrance 
in honour of Raghava. Hundreds and thousands of horses, cows 
and heifers were distributed amongst the Twice-born by that 
prince, who had already bestowed hundreds of bulls on the 
brahmins ; and Raghava gave them thirty crorcs of gold and 
rich attire and priceless ornaments. 
Then a golden crown encrusted with precious stones, glittering 
like the sun's rays, was offered to Sugriva by that valiant leader 
of men, who bestowed two bracelets set with emeralds, the 
lustre of which rivalled the moon's, on Angada, the son of Bali. 
And Rama gave unto Sita a necklace of pearls embellished with 
gems that was without peer and like unto moonbeams, and 
celestial and immaculate raiment richly embroidered with 
superb ornaments. Then Vaidehi, the delight of Janaka, 
prepared to bestow her own necklace on the son of the Wind as 
a token and, unclasping it from her neck, she looked on all the 
monkeys and on her lord again and again, whereupon Rama, 
understanding her gesture and approving it, said to the daughter 
of Janaka : — 
" Give the necklace to whom thou pleaseth, O Lovely and 
Illustrious Lady ! " 
Thereupon the dark-eyed Sita gave the necklace to the son of 
Vayu, and Hanuman, in whom courage, strength, glory, stall, capa bility and reserve, prudence, audacity and prowess were ever to be 
found, that Hon among monkeys, adorned with that necklace, 
369 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
looked as radiant as a mountain covered by a white cloud 
silvered by an aureole of moonbeams. 
Thereafter all die elder and leading monkeys received fitting 
gifts of jewels and raiment, whereupon Sugriva, Hanuman, 
Jambavan and all those monkeys having been overwhelmed with 
favours by Rama of imperishable exploits, and received precious 
gems in addition, according to their merits, with all that their 
hearts could desire, returned joyfully from whence they had 
come ; and Rama, the scourge of his foes, lord of the earth, 
sought out Dvivida, Mainda and Nila and satisfied all their 
wishes. 
Thereupon the festival which they had attended being termi nated, the foremost of the monkeys took leave of that lord of men 
and returned to Kishkindha. And Sugriva, the King of the 
Monkeys, having assisted at Rama's coronation and being 
overwhelmed with honours by him, went back to his capital. 
Thereafter, Bibishana, that virtuous monarch, having obtained 
the kingdom of his forbears, returned to Lanka full of glory 
with the leading titans. 
The supremely illustrious and magnanimous Raghava, having 
slain his foes, ruled his empire in peace, enhancing the joy of his 
people. 
Devoted to virtue, Rama addressed Lakshmana who was fixed 
in his duty, saying :— 
" O Faithful One, aid me in defending the land protected by 
the ancient kings with their armies. As was the custom of our 
ancestors in days of yore, do thou share the weight of state 
affairs with me as heir presumptive." 
Yet, despite the earnest entreaties addressed to him, Saumitri 
did not accept the dignity, and the high-souled Rama conferred 
it on Bharata. Thereafter that prince performed the Paundarika, 
Ashvamedha, Vajimedha and other sacrifices of many kinds again 
and again. Reigning for ten thousand years, he offered up ten 
horse sacrifices, distributing immense wealth in charity, and 
Rama, whose arms reached to his knees, the powerful elder 
brother of Lakshmana, ruled the earth in glory and performed 
many sacrifices with his sons, brothers and kinsfolk. No widow 
was ever found in distress nor was there any danger from snakes 
or disease during his reign ; there were no malefactors in his 
370 
YUDDHA KANDA 
kingdom nor did any suffer harm ; no aged person ever attended 
the funeral of a younger relative ; happiness was universal ; 
each attended to his duty and they had only to look on Rama to 
give up enmity. Men lived for a thousand years, each having a 
thousand sons who were free from infirmity and anxiety ; trees 
bore fruit and flowers perpetually ; Parjanya sent down rain 
when it was needed and Maruta blew auspiciously ; all works 
undertaken bore happy results and all engaged in their respective 
duties and eschewed evil. All were endowed with good qualities ; 
all were devoted to pious observances and Rama ruled over the 
kingdom for ten thousand years. 
This renowned and sacred epic, the foremost of all, granting 
long life and victory to kings, was composed by the Rishi Valmiki, 
and he who hears it constantly in this world is delivered from 
evil ; if he desires sons he obtains them, if wealth he acquires it. 
He who, in this world, listens to the story of Rama's enthrone ment, if he be a king, will conquer the earth and overcome his 
enemies. Women will obtain sons as Sumitra and Kaushalya 
obtained Rama and Lakshmana and Kaikeyi, Bharata. 
The hearing of the ' Ramayana ' grants longevity and victory 
equal to Rama's, he of imperishable exploits. The one who, 
mastering his anger, listens with faith to this epic, formerly 
composed by Valmiki, overcomes all obstacles and those who 
hear this story set forth by Valmiki will return from their 
journeys in foreign lands and rejoice the hearts of their kinsfolk. 
They will obtain fulfilment of all the desires they conceive 
in this world from Raghava, and its recitation will bring delight 
to the Celestials ; it pacifies the adverse forces in those houses 
where it is to be found. 
Hearing it, a king will conquer the earth ; if he be a stranger 
he will fare well ; women who hear this sacred epic in their 
pregnancy, will give birth to sons who are unsurpassed. He who 
recites it with reverence will be freed from all evil and live long. 
Warriors should listen to it recited by the Twice-born with 
bowed heads in order to achieve prosperity and obtain sons. 
Rama is ever pleased with the one who hears this epic or who 
recites it in its entirety and he who does so will obtain a felicity 
comparable to Rama's, who is Vishnu, the Eternal, the Primeval 
God, the Long-armed Hari, Narayana, the Lord. Such are the 
371 
THE RAMAYANA OF VALMIKI 
fruits produced by this ancient narrative. May prosperity 
attend thee ! Recite it with love and may the power of Vishnu 
increase ! 
The Celestial Beings rejoice in the understanding and hearing 
of * Ramayana ' and the Ancestors are gratified. Those who, in 
devotion, transcribe this history of Rama, composed by the 
Rishi Valmiki, attain to the region of Brahma. 
The hearing of this rare and beautiful poem in this world 
brings prosperous families, wealth and grain in abundance, 
lovely wives, supreme felicity and complete success in all 
undertakings. 
This narrative which promotes long life, health, renown, 
brotherly love, wisdom, happiness and power should be heard in 
reverence by virtuous men desirous of felicity. 
END OF YUDDHA KANDA 